    LITURGY OF ST. BASIL THE GREAT    
    1    
Βιβλία - Πηγαί Books - Sources
Ἱερατικόν Hieratikon
This is the text of the Divine Liturgy of St. Basil
the Great, as it is celebrated on January 1 and the
Sundays of Lent. The variable parts have been omitted.
It is intended to be used in conjunction with the
“Liturgy - Variable Parts” files available each day on
the GOA DCS.
This is the text of the Divine Liturgy of St. Basil
the Great, as it is celebrated on January 1 and the
Sundays of Lent. The variable parts have been omitted.
It is intended to be used in conjunction with the
“Liturgy - Variable Parts” files available each day on
the GOA DCS.
__________ __________
 
ΛΕΙΤΟΥΡΓΙΑ - ΜΕΤΑΒΛΗΤΑ / ΤΥΠΙΚΑ LITURGY - VARIABLES / TYPIKA
ΕΝΑΡΞΙΣ, ΕΙΡΗΝΙΚΑ ΚΑΙ ΑΝΤΙΦΩΝΑ ENARXIS, PEACE LITANY, AND ANTIPHONS
ΔΙΑΚΟΝΟΣ DEACON
Εὐλόγησον, Δέσποτα. Master, give the blessing.
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ PRIEST
Εὐλογημένη ἡ βασιλεία τοῦ Πατρὸς καὶ
τοῦ Υἱοῦ καὶ τοῦ ἁγίου Πνεύματος, νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ
καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων.
Blessed is the kingdom of the Father and
the Son and the Holy Spirit, now and ever and
to the ages of ages.
ΧΟΡΟΣ CHOIR
Ἀμήν. Amen.
ΔΙΑΚΟΝΟΣ DEACON
Ἐν εἰρήνῃ τοῦ Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν. In peace let us pray to the Lord.
ΧΟΡΟΣ (μεθʼ ἑκάστην δέησιν) CHOIR (after each petition)
Κύριε, ἐλέησον. Lord, have mercy.
ΔΙΑΚΟΝΟΣ DEACON
Ὑπὲρ τῆς ἄνωθεν εἰρήνης καὶ τῆς
σωτηρίας τῶν ψυχῶν ἡμῶν τοῦ Κυρίου
δεηθῶμεν.
For the peace from above and for the
salvation of our souls, let us pray to the Lord.
Ὑπὲρ τῆς εἰρήνης τοῦ σύμπαντος κόσμου,
εὐσταθείας τῶν ἁγίων τοῦ Θεοῦ Ἐκκλησιῶν
καὶ τῆς τῶν πάντων ἑνώσεως τοῦ Κυρίου
δεηθῶμεν.
For the peace of the whole world, for the
stability of the holy churches of God, and for
the unity of all, let us pray to the Lord.
Ὑπὲρ τοῦ ἁγίου οἴκου τούτου καὶ τῶν
μετὰ πίστεως, εὐλαβείας καὶ φόβου Θεοῦ
εἰσιόντων ἐν αὐτῷ τοῦ Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν.
For this holy house and for those who
enter it with faith, reverence, and the fear of
God, let us pray to the Lord.
Ὑπὲρ τῶν εὐσεβῶν καὶ ὀρθοδόξων
χριστιανῶν τοῦ Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν.
For pious and Orthodox Christians, let us
pray to the Lord.
    ΛΕΙΤΟΥΡΓΙΑ ΜΕΓΑΛΟΥ ΒΑΣΙΛΕΙΟΥ    
    2    
Ὑπὲρ τοῦ Ἀρχιεπισκόπου ἡμῶν (δεῖνος),
τοῦ τιμίου πρεσβυτερίου, τῆς ἐν Χριστῷ
διακονίας, παντὸς τοῦ κλήρου καὶ τοῦ λαοῦ
τοῦ Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν.
For our Archbishop (name), for the
honorable presbyterate, for the diaconate in
Christ, and for all the clergy and the people, let
us pray to the Lord.
Ὑπὲρ τοῦ εὐσεβοῦς ἡμῶν γένους, τοῦ
προέδρου καὶ πάσης ἀρχῆς καὶ ἐξουσίας ἐν τῷ
κράτει ἡμῶν, καὶ τοῦ κατὰ ξηρὰν θάλασσαν
καὶ ἀέρα φιλοχρίστου ἡμῶν στρατοῦ, τοῦ
Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν.
For our country, the president, all those
in public service, and for our armed forces
everywhere, let us pray to the Lord.
Ὑπὲρ τῆς Ἁγίας τοῦ Χριστοῦ Μεγάλης
Ἐκκλησίας, τῆς Ἱερᾶς ἡμῶν Ἀρχιεπισκοπῆς,
[τῆς Ἱερᾶς Μητροπόλεως ταύτης,] τῆς πόλεως
καὶ κοινότητος ταύτης, πάσης πόλεως, χώρας
καὶ τῶν πίστει οἰκούντων ἐν αὐταῖς, τοῦ
Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν.
For the Holy and Great Church of Christ,
for our Sacred Archdiocese, [for this Sacred
Metropolis,] for this city and parish, for every
city and land, and for the faithful who live in
them, let us pray to the Lord.
Ὑπὲρ εὐκρασίας ἀέρων, εὐφορίας τῶν
καρπῶν τῆς γῆς καὶ καιρῶν εἰρηνικῶν τοῦ
Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν.
For favorable weather, for an abundance of
the fruits of the earth, and for peaceful times,
let us pray to the Lord.
Ὑπὲρ πλεόντων, ὁδοιπορούντων,
νοσούντων, καμνόντων, αἰχμαλώτων καὶ τῆς
σωτηρίας αὐτῶν τοῦ Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν.
For those who travel by land, sea, and air,
for the sick, the suffering, the captives and for
their salvation, let us pray to the Lord.
Ὑπὲρ τοῦ ῥυσθῆναι ἡμᾶς ἀπὸ πάσης
θλίψεως, ὀργῆς, κινδύνου καὶ ἀνάγκης τοῦ
Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν.
For our deliverance from all affliction,
wrath, danger, and distress, let us pray to the
Lord.
Ἀντιλαβοῦ, σῶσον, ἐλέησον καὶ
διαφύλαξον ἡμᾶς, ὁ Θεός, τῇ σῇ χάριτι.
Help us, save us, have mercy on us, and
protect us, O God, by Your grace.
Τῆς παναγίας, ἀχράντου,
ὑπερευλογημένης, ἐνδόξου, δεσποίνης ἡμῶν,
Θεοτόκου καὶ ἀειπαρθένου Μαρίας μετὰ
πάντων τῶν ἁγίων μνημονεύσαντες, ἑαυτοὺς
καὶ ἀλλήλους καὶ πᾶσαν τὴν ζωὴν ἡμῶν
Χριστῷ τῷ Θεῷ παραθώμεθα.
Remembering our all-holy, immaculate,
most blessed, and glorious Lady, the
Theotokos and ever-virgin Mary, with all
the saints, let us commend ourselves and one
another and our whole life to Christ our God.
ΧΟΡΟΣ· Σοί, Κύριε. CHOIR: To You, O Lord.
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ (χαμηλοφώνως) PRIEST (in a low voice)
ΕΥΧΗ Αʹ ΑΝΤΙΦΩΝΟΥ PRAYER OF FIRST ANTIPHON
Κύριε ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν, οὗ τὸ κράτος ἀνείκαστον
καὶ ἡ δόξα ἀκατάληπτος, οὗ τὸ ἔλεος ἀμέτρητον καὶ
Lord, our God, whose dominion is incomparable and
glory incomprehensible; whose mercy is immeasurable,
    LITURGY OF ST. BASIL THE GREAT    
    3    
ἡ φιλανθρωπία ἄφατος· αὐτός, Δέσποτα, κατὰ τὴν
εὐσπλαγχνίαν σου, ἐπίβλεψον ἐφ’ ἡμᾶς καὶ ἐπὶ τὸν ἅγιον
οἶκον τοῦτον καὶ ποίησον μεθ’ ἡμῶν καὶ τῶν συνευχομένων
ἡμῖν πλούσια τὰ ἐλέη σου καὶ τοὺς οἰκτιρμούς σου.
and love for humankind ineffable: Look upon us and upon
this holy house in Your loving-kindness, and grant to us
and to those who pray with us Your abundant mercy and
compassion.
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ (ἐκφώνως) PRIEST (aloud)
Ὅτι πρέπει σοι πᾶσα δόξα, τιμὴ καὶ
προσκύνησις, τῷ Πατρὶ καὶ τῷ Υἱῷ καὶ τῷ
ἁγίῳ Πνεύματι, νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας
τῶν αἰώνων.
For to You belong all glory, honor, and
worship, to the Father and the Son and the
Holy Spirit, now and ever and to the ages of
ages.
ΧΟΡΟΣ CHOIR
Ἀμήν. Amen.
ΧΟΡΟΣ CHOIR
Ἀντίφωνον Αʹ The 1st Antiphon
(Δείτε τά μεταβλητά.) (See Liturgy Variables.)
 
Μικρὰ Συναπτή Small Litany
ΔΙΑΚΟΝΟΣ DEACON
Ἔτι καὶ ἔτι ἐν εἰρήνῃ τοῦ Κυρίου
δεηθῶμεν.
Again and again in peace let us pray to the
Lord.
ΧΟΡΟΣ· Κύριε, ἐλέησον. CHOIR: Lord, have mercy.
ΔΙΑΚΟΝΟΣ DEACON
Ἀντιλαβοῦ, σῶσον, ἐλέησον καὶ
διαφύλαξον ἡμᾶς, ὁ Θεός, τῇ σῇ χάριτι.
Help us, save us, have mercy on us, and
protect us, O God, by Your grace.
ΧΟΡΟΣ· Κύριε, ἐλέησον. CHOIR: Lord, have mercy.
ΔΙΑΚΟΝΟΣ DEACON
Τῆς παναγίας, ἀχράντου,
ὑπερευλογημένης, ἐνδόξου, δεσποίνης ἡμῶν,
Θεοτόκου καὶ ἀειπαρθένου Μαρίας μετὰ
πάντων τῶν ἁγίων μνημονεύσαντες, ἑαυτοὺς
καὶ ἀλλήλους καὶ πᾶσαν τὴν ζωὴν ἡμῶν
Χριστῷ τῷ Θεῷ παραθώμεθα.
Remembering our all-holy, immaculate,
most blessed, and glorious Lady, the
Theotokos and ever-virgin Mary, with all
the saints, let us commend ourselves and one
another and our whole life to Christ our God.
ΧΟΡΟΣ· Σοί, Κύριε. CHOIR: To You, O Lord.
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ (χαμηλοφώνως) PRIEST (in a low voice)
ΕΥΧΗ Βʹ ΑΝΤΙΦΩΝΟΥ PRAYER OF SECOND ANTIPHON
Κύριε ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν, σῶσον τὸν λαόν σου καὶ
εὐλόγησον τὴν κληρονομίαν σου· τὸ πλήρωμα τῆς
Ἐκκλησίας σου φύλαξον· ἁγίασον τοὺς ἀγαπῶντας τὴν
εὐπρέπειαν τοῦ οἴκου σου· σὺ αὐτοὺς ἀντιδόξασον τῇ θεϊκῇ
Lord, our God, save Your people and bless Your
inheritance. Protect all the members of Your Church.
Sanctify those who love the beauty of Your house. Glorify
    ΛΕΙΤΟΥΡΓΙΑ ΜΕΓΑΛΟΥ ΒΑΣΙΛΕΙΟΥ    
    4    
σου δυνάμει καὶ μὴ ἐγκαταλίπῃς ἡμᾶς τοὺς ἐλπίζοντας ἐπὶ
σέ.
them in return by Your divine power, and forsake us not who
have set our hope in You.
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ (ἐκφώνως) PRIEST (aloud)
Ὅτι σὸν τὸ κράτος καὶ σοῦ ἐστιν ἡ
βασιλεία καὶ ἡ δύναμις καὶ ἡ δόξα, τοῦ Πατρὸς
καὶ τοῦ Υἱοῦ καὶ τοῦ ἁγίου Πνεύματος, νῦν
καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων.
For Yours is the dominion, and Yours is
the kingdom and the power and the glory, of
the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit,
now and ever and to the ages of ages.
ΧΟΡΟΣ CHOIR
Ἀμήν. Amen.
ΧΟΡΟΣ CHOIR
Ἀντίφωνον Βʹ The 2nd Antiphon
(Δείτε τά μεταβλητά.) (See Liturgy Variables.)
 
Ὁ μονογενὴς Υἱὸς καὶ Λόγος τοῦ Θεοῦ,
ἀθάνατος ὑπάρχων καὶ καταδεξάμενος διὰ τὴν
ἡμετέραν σωτηρίαν σαρκωθῆναι ἐκ τῆς ἁγίας
Θεοτόκου καὶ ἀειπαρθένου Μαρίας, ἀτρέπτως
ἐνανθρωπήσας, σταυρωθείς τε, Χριστὲ ὁ Θεός,
θανάτῳ θάνατον πατήσας, εἷς ὢν τῆς ἁγίας
Τριάδος, συνδοξαζόμενος τῷ Πατρὶ καὶ τῷ
ἁγίῳ Πνεύματι, σῶσον ἡμᾶς.
Only-begotten Son and Logos of God,
being immortal, You condescended for our
salvation to take flesh from the holy Theotokos
and ever-virgin Mary and, without change,
became man. Christ, our God, You were
crucified and conquered death by death. Being
one of the Holy Trinity, glorified with the
Father and the Holy Spirit: Save us.
Μικρὰ Συναπτή Small Litany
ΔΙΑΚΟΝΟΣ DEACON
Ἔτι καὶ ἔτι ἐν εἰρήνῃ τοῦ Κυρίου
δεηθῶμεν.
Again and again in peace let us pray to the
Lord.
ΧΟΡΟΣ· Κύριε, ἐλέησον. CHOIR: Lord, have mercy.
ΔΙΑΚΟΝΟΣ DEACON
Ἀντιλαβοῦ, σῶσον, ἐλέησον καὶ
διαφύλαξον ἡμᾶς, ὁ Θεός, τῇ σῇ χάριτι.
Help us, save us, have mercy on us, and
protect us, O God, by Your grace.
ΧΟΡΟΣ· Κύριε, ἐλέησον. CHOIR: Lord, have mercy.
ΔΙΑΚΟΝΟΣ DEACON
Τῆς παναγίας, ἀχράντου,
ὑπερευλογημένης, ἐνδόξου, δεσποίνης ἡμῶν,
Θεοτόκου καὶ ἀειπαρθένου Μαρίας μετὰ
πάντων τῶν ἁγίων μνημονεύσαντες, ἑαυτοὺς
Remembering our all-holy, immaculate,
most blessed, and glorious Lady, the
Theotokos and ever-virgin Mary, with all
the saints, let us commend ourselves and one
another and our whole life to Christ our God.
    LITURGY OF ST. BASIL THE GREAT    
    5    
καὶ ἀλλήλους καὶ πᾶσαν τὴν ζωὴν ἡμῶν
Χριστῷ τῷ Θεῷ παραθώμεθα.
ΧΟΡΟΣ· Σοί, Κύριε. CHOIR: To You, O Lord.
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ (χαμηλοφώνως) PRIEST (in a low voice)
ΕΥΧΗ Γʹ ΑΝΤΙΦΩΝΟΥ PRAYER OF THIRD ANTIPHON
Ὁ τὰς κοινὰς ταύτας καὶ συμφώνους ἡμῖν χαρισάμενος
προσευχάς, ὁ καὶ δυσὶ καὶ τρισὶ συμφωνοῦσιν ἐπὶ τῷ ὀνόματί
σου τὰς αἰτήσεις παρέχειν ἐπαγγειλάμενος· αὐτὸς καὶ νῦν
τῶν δούλων σου τὰ αἰτήματα πρὸς τὸ συμφέρον πλήρωσον,
χορηγῶν ἡμῖν ἐν τῷ παρόντι αἰῶνι τὴν ἐπίγνωσιν τῆς σῆς
ἀληθείας καὶ ἐν τῷ μέλλοντι ζωὴν αἰώνιον χαριζόμενος.
Lord, You have granted us to offer these common
prayers in unison and have promised that when two or three
agree in Your name, You will grant their requests. Fulfill
now, O Lord, the petitions of Your servants as may be of
benefit to them, granting us in the present age the knowledge
of Your truth, and in the age to come eternal life.
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ (ἐκφώνως) PRIEST (aloud)
Ὅτι ἀγαθὸς καὶ φιλάνθρωπος Θεὸς
ὑπάρχεις καὶ σοὶ τὴν δόξαν ἀναπέμπομεν, τῷ
Πατρὶ καὶ τῷ Υἱῷ καὶ τῷ ἁγίῳ Πνεύματι, νῦν
καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων.
For You are good and benevolent God,
and to You we offer up glory, to the Father and
the Son and the Holy Spirit, now and ever and
to the ages of ages.
ΧΟΡΟΣ CHOIR
Ἀμήν. Amen.
ΧΟΡΟΣ CHOIR
Ἀντίφωνον Γʹ The 3rd Antiphon.
(Δείτε τά μεταβλητά.) (See Liturgy Variables.)
 
Η ΕΙΣΟΔΟΣ THE ENTRANCE
ΔΙΑΚΟΝΟΣ (χαμηλοφώνως) DEACON (in a low voice)
Τοῦ Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν. Κύριε, ἐλέησον. Let us pray to the Lord. Lord, have mercy.
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ (χαμηλοφώνως) PRIEST (in a low voice)
ΕΥΧΗ ΤΗΣ ΕΙΣΟΔΟΥ ENTRANCE PRAYER
Δέσποτα Κύριε, ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν, ὁ καταστήσας ἐν
οὐρανοῖς τάγματα καὶ στρατιὰς ἀγγέλων καὶ ἀρχαγγέλων
εἰς λειτουργίαν τῆς σῆς δόξης, ποίησον σὺν τῇ εἰσόδῳ ἡμῶν
εἴσοδον ἁγίων ἀγγέλων γενέσθαι, συλλειτουργούντων ἡμῖν
καὶ συνδοξολογούντων τὴν σὴν ἀγαθότητα. Ὅτι πρέπει σοι
πᾶσα δόξα, τιμὴ καὶ προσκύνησις, τῷ Πατρὶ καὶ τῷ Υἱῷ
καὶ τῷ ἁγίῳ Πνεύματι, νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν
αἰώνων. Ἀμήν.
Master, Lord our God, who has established the orders
and hosts of angels and archangels in heaven to minister to
Your glory, grant that holy angels may enter with us, that
together we may celebrate and glorify Your goodness. For to
You belong all glory, honor, and worship, to the Father and
the Son and the Holy Spirit, now and ever and to the ages of
ages. Amen.
ΔΙΑΚΟΝΟΣ (χαμηλοφώνως) DEACON (in a low voice)
Εὐλόγησον, δέσποτα, τὴν ἁγίαν εἴσοδον. Master, bless the holy entrance.
    ΛΕΙΤΟΥΡΓΙΑ ΜΕΓΑΛΟΥ ΒΑΣΙΛΕΙΟΥ    
    6    
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ (χαμηλοφώνως) PRIEST (in a low voice)
Εὐλογημένη ἡ εἴσοδος τῶν ἁγίων σου πάντοτε· νῦν καὶ
ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. Ἀμήν.
Blessed be the entrance of Your holy ones always, now
and ever and to the ages of ages. Amen.
ΔΙΑΚΟΝΟΣ (ἐκφώνως) DEACON (aloud)
Σοφία. Ὀρθοί. Wisdom. Arise.
ΚΛΗΡΟΣ ἤ· ΧΟΡΟΣ CLERGY or: CHOIR
Εἰσοδικόν.  Ἦχος βʹ. Entrance Hymn.  Mode 2.
(Δείτε τά μεταβλητά.) (See Liturgy Variables.)
 
Ὕμνοι μετὰ τὴν Μικρὰν Εἴσοδον Hymns after the Entrance.
ΧΟΡΟΣ CHOIR
(Δείτε τά μεταβλητά.) (See Liturgy Variables.)
 
ΔΙΑΚΟΝΟΣ DEACON
Τοῦ Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν. Let us pray to the Lord.
ΧΟΡΟΣ CHOIR
Κύριε, ἐλέησον. Lord, have mercy.
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ (χαμηλοφώνως) PRIEST (in a low voice)
ΕΥΧΗ ΤΟΥ ΤΡΙΣΑΓΙΟΥ ΥΜΝΟΥ PRAYER OF THE TRISAGIOS HYMN
Ὁ Θεὸς ὁ ἅγιος, ὁ ἐν ἁγίοις ἀναπαυόμενος, ὁ τρισαγίῳ
φωνῇ ὑπὸ τῶν Σεραφεὶμ ἀνυμνούμενος καὶ ὑπὸ τῶν
Χερουβεὶμ δοξολογούμενος καὶ ὑπὸ πάσης ἐπουρανίου
δυνάμεως προσκυνούμενος· ὁ ἐκ τοῦ μὴ ὄντος εἰς τὸ
εἶναι παραγαγὼν τὰ σύμπαντα· ὁ κτίσας τὸν ἄνθρωπον
κατ’ εἰκόνα σὴν καὶ ὁμοίωσιν καὶ παντί σου χαρίσματι
κατακοσμήσας· ὁ διδοὺς αἰτοῦντι σοφίαν καὶ σύνεσιν καὶ
μὴ παρορῶν ἁμαρτάνοντα, ἀλλὰ θέμενος ἐπὶ σωτηρίᾳ
μετάνοιαν· ὁ καταξιώσας ἡμᾶς τοὺς ταπεινοὺς καὶ ἀναξίους
δούλους σου καὶ ἐν τῇ ὥρᾳ ταύτῃ στῆναι κατενώπιον τῆς
δόξης τοῦ ἁγίου σου θυσιαστηρίου καὶ τὴν ὀφειλομένην σοι
προσκύνησιν καὶ δοξολογίαν προσάγειν· αὐτός, Δέσποτα,
πρόσδεξαι καὶ ἐκ στόματος ἡμῶν τῶν ἁμαρτωλῶν τὸν
τρισάγιον ὕμνον καὶ ἐπίσκεψαι ἡμᾶς ἐν τῇ χρηστότητί
σου. Συγχώρησον ἡμῖν πᾶν πλημμέλημα ἑκούσιόν τε καὶ
ἀκούσιον· ἁγίασον ἡμῶν τὰς ψυχὰς καὶ τὰ σώματα· καὶ δὸς
ἡμῖν ἐν ὁσιότητι λατρεύειν σοι πάσας τὰς ἡμέρας τῆς ζωῆς
ἡμῶν· πρεσβείαις τῆς ἁγίας Θεοτόκου καὶ πάντων τῶν ἁγίων
τῶν ἀπ’ αἰῶνός σοι εὐαρεστησάντων.
O Holy God, who is resting among the holy ones,
praised by the Seraphim with the thrice-holy voice, glorified
by the Cherubim, and worshiped by every celestial power,
You have brought all things into being out of nothing. You
have created man according to Your image and likeness
and adorned him with all the gifts of Your grace. You give
wisdom and understanding to the one who asks, and You
overlook not the sinner, but have set repentance as the way of
salvation. You have granted us, Your humble and unworthy
servants, to stand even at this hour before the glory of Your
holy Altar of sacrifice and to offer to You due worship and
praise. Master, accept the Trisagion Hymn also from the lips
of us sinners, and visit us in Your goodness. Forgive all our
voluntary and involuntary transgressions, sanctify our souls
and bodies, and grant that we may worship You in holiness
all the days of our lives, through the intercessions of the
holy Theotokos and of all the saints who have pleased You
throughout the ages.
    LITURGY OF ST. BASIL THE GREAT    
    7    
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ (ἐκφώνως) PRIEST (aloud)
Ὅτι ἅγιος εἶ, ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν, καὶ σοὶ τὴν
δόξαν ἀναπέμπομεν, τῷ Πατρὶ καὶ τῷ Υἱῷ καὶ
τῷ ἁγίῳ Πνεύματι, νῦν καὶ ἀεί…
For You, our God, are holy, and to You we
offer up glory, to the Father and the Son and
the Holy Spirit, now and ever…
ΔΙΑΚΟΝΟΣ DEACON
καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. and to the ages of ages.
ΧΟΡΟΣ CHOIR
Ἀμήν. Amen.
Τὸ Τρισάγιον Trisagion Hymn
(Δείτε τά μεταβλητά.) (See Liturgy Variables.)
 
Ὁ Ἀποστολος. Epistle Reading
ΔΙΑΚΟΝΟΣ· Πρόσχωμεν. DEACON: Let us be attentive.
ΑΝΑΓΝΩΣΤΗΣ READER
Προκείμενον. Prokeimenon.
(Δείτε τά μεταβλητά.) (See Liturgy Variables.)
ΔΙΑΚΟΝΟΣ· Σοφία. DEACON: Wisdom.
ΑΝΑΓΝΩΣΤΗΣ READER
(Δείτε τά μεταβλητά.)  τὸ ἀνάγνωσμα. The reading is from (See Liturgy
Variables.)
ΔΙΑΚΟΝΟΣ· Πρόσχωμεν. DEACON: Let us be attentive.
ΑΝΑΓΝΩΣΤΗΣ READER
(Δείτε τά μεταβλητά.) (See Liturgy Variables.)
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ PRIEST
Εἰρήνη σοι τῷ ἀναγνόντι. Peace be with you the reader.
ΧΟΡΟΣ CHOIR
Ἀλληλούϊα. Alleluia before Gospel
(Δείτε τά μεταβλητά.) (See Liturgy Variables.)
 
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ (χαμηλοφώνως) PRIEST (in a low voice)
ΕΥΧΗ ΤΟΥ ΕΥΑΓΓΕΛΙΟΥ PRAYER OF THE GOSPEL
Ἔλλαμψον ἐν ταῖς καρδίαις ἡμῶν, φιλάνθρωπε
Δέσποτα, τὸ τῆς σῆς θεογνωσίας ἀκήρατον φῶς καὶ
τοὺς τῆς διανοίας ἡμῶν διάνοιξον ὀφθαλμοὺς εἰς τὴν
τῶν εὐαγγελικῶν σου κηρυγμάτων κατανόησιν. Ἔνθες
ἡμῖν καὶ τὸν τῶν μακαρίων σου ἐντολῶν φόβον, ἵνα, τὰς
σαρκικὰς ἐπιθυμίας καταπατήσαντες, πνευματικὴν πολιτείαν
μετέλθωμεν, πάντα τὰ πρὸς εὐαρέστησιν τὴν σὴν καὶ
Shine in our hearts, O benevolent Lord, the pure light
of Your divine knowledge, and open the eyes of our mind
that we may comprehend the proclamations of Your Gospels.
Instill in us the fear that Your blessed commandments
inspire, so that, crushing carnal desires, we may seek the
spiritual citizenship, thinking and doing all those things
that are pleasing to You. For You, Christ our God, are the
    ΛΕΙΤΟΥΡΓΙΑ ΜΕΓΑΛΟΥ ΒΑΣΙΛΕΙΟΥ    
    8    
φρονοῦντες καὶ πράττοντες. Σὺ γὰρ εἶ ὁ φωτισμὸς τῶν
ψυχῶν καὶ τῶν σωμάτων ἡμῶν, Χριστὲ ὁ Θεός, καὶ σοὶ
τὴν δόξαν ἀναπέμπομεν σὺν τῷ ἀνάρχῳ σου Πατρὶ καὶ τῷ
παναγίῳ καὶ ἀγαθῷ καὶ ζωοποιῷ σου Πνεύματι, νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ
καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. Ἀμήν.
illumination of our souls and bodies, and to You we offer
up glory, and to Your Father, who is without beginning, and
Your all-holy, good, and life-creating Spirit, now and ever
and to the ages of ages. Amen.
Τὸ Εὐαγγέλιον The Gospel
ΔΙΑΚΟΝΟΣ DEACON
Σοφία. Ὀρθοί. Ἀκούσωμεν τοῦ ἁγίου
Εὐαγγελίου.
Wisdom. Arise. Let us hear the holy
Gospel.
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ· Εἰρήνη πᾶσι. PRIEST: Peace be with all.
ΧΟΡΟΣ· Καὶ τῷ πνεύματί σου. CHOIR: And with your spirit.
ΔΙΑΚΟΝΟΣ DEACON
Ἐκ τοῦ κατὰ (Δείτε τά μεταβλητά.)  ἁγίου
Εὐαγγελίου τὸ ἀνάγνωσμα.
The reading is from the holy Gospel
according to (See Liturgy Variables.)
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ· Πρόσχωμεν. PRIEST: Let us be attentive.
ΧΟΡΟΣ CHOIR
Δόξα σοι, Κύριε, δόξα σοι. Glory to You, O Lord, glory to You.
ΔΙΑΚΟΝΟΣ DEACON
(Δείτε τά μεταβλητά.) (See Liturgy Variables.)
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ PRIEST
Εἰρήνη σοι τῷ εὐαγγελιζομένῳ. Peace be with you who read the Gospel.
ΧΟΡΟΣ CHOIR
Δόξα σοι, Κύριε, δόξα σοι. Glory to You, O Lord, glory to You.
(Παραλείπονται ἡ ἐκτενής, ἡ δέησις ὑπἐρ τῶν
κατηχουμένων, καὶ ἡ αʹ εὐχὴ τῶν πιστῶν.)
(The litanies of Supplication and for the Catechumens
and the First Prayer of the Faithful have been omitted.)
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ (χαμηλοφώνως) PRIEST (in a low voice)
ΕΥΧΗ ΠΙΣΤΩΝ Bʹ SECOND PRAYER FOR THE FAITHFUL
Ὁ Θεός, ὁ ἐπισκεψάμενος ἐν ἐλέει καὶ οἰκτιρμοῖς
τὴν ταπείνωσιν ἡμῶν· ὁ στήσας ἡμᾶς τοὺς ταπεινοὺς καὶ
ἁμαρτωλοὺς καὶ ἀναξίους δούλους σου κατενώπιον τῆς
ἁγίας δόξης σου λειτουργεῖν τῷ ἁγίῳ σου θυσιαστηρίῳ·
σὺ ἐνίσχυσον ἡμᾶς τῇ δυνάμει του ἁγίου σου Πνεύματος
εἰς τὴν διακονίαν ταύτην καὶ δὸς ἡμῖν λόγον ἐν ἀνοίξει τοῦ
στόματος ἡμῶν, εἰς τὸ ἐπικαλεῖσθαι τὴν χάριν τοῦ ἁγίου σου
Πνεύματος ἐπὶ τῶν μελλόντων προτίθεσθαι δώρων.
O God, with mercy and tender love You visited our
lowliness and let us Your humble servants stand before Your
holy glory to liturgize at Your holy Altar of sacrifice, sinful
and unworthy that we be. We pray You enable us to perform
this ministry by the power of Your Holy Spirit, and give us
the words to speak when we open our mouths to invoke Your
Holy Spirit’s grace on the gifts about to be offered.
    LITURGY OF ST. BASIL THE GREAT    
    9    
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ (ἐκφώνως) PRIEST (aloud)
Ὅπως ὑπό τοῦ κράτους σου πάντοτε
φυλαττόμενοι, σοὶ δόξαν ἀναπέμπωμεν, τῷ
Πατρὶ καὶ τῷ Υἱῷ καὶ τῷ ἁγίῳ Πνεύματι, νῦν
καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων.
That, ever guarded by Your might, we may
ascribe glory to You, to the Father and to the
Son and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever and
to the ages of ages.
ΧΟΡΟΣ· Ἀμήν. CHOIR: Amen.
Η ΕΙΣΟΔΟΣ ΤΩΝ ΤΙΜΙΩΝ ΔΩΡΩΝ ENTRANCE OF THE HOLY GIFTS
ΧΟΡΟΣ CHOIR
Τὸ Χερουβικόν. The Cherubic Hymn.
Οἱ τὰ Χερουβεὶμ μυστικῶς εἰκονίζοντες
καὶ τῇ ζωοποιῷ Τριάδι τὸν τρισάγιον
ὕμνον προσᾴδοντες, πᾶσαν νῦν βιοτικὴν
ἀποθώμεθα μέριμναν, ὡς τὸν βασιλέα τῶν
ὅλων ὑποδεξόμενοι.
Let us, who mystically represent the
Cherubim and who sing the thrice-holy hymn
to the life-creating Trinity, now lay aside every
worldly care. So that we may receive the King
of all.
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ (χαμηλοφώνως) PRIEST (in a low voice)
ΕΥΧΗ ΤΟΥ ΧΕΡΟΥΒΙΚΟΥ ΥΜΝΟΥ PRAYER OF THE CHERUBIC HYMN
Οὐδεὶς ἄξιος τῶν συνδεδεμένων ταῖς σαρκικαῖς
ἐπιθυμίαις καὶ ἡδοναῖς προσέρχεσθαι ἢ προσεγγίζειν ἢ
λειτουργεῖν σοι, βασιλεῦ τῆς δόξης· τὸ γὰρ διακονεῖν σοι
μέγα καὶ φοβερὸν καὶ αὐταῖς ταῖς ἐπουρανίαις δυνάμεσιν.
Ἀλλ’ ὅμως διὰ τὴν ἄφατον καὶ ἀμέτρητόν σου φιλανθρωπίαν
ἀτρέπτως καὶ ἀναλλοιώτως γέγονας ἄνθρωπος καὶ ἀρχιερεὺς
ἡμῶν ἐχρημάτισας καὶ τῆς λειτουργικῆς ταύτης καὶ
ἀναιμάκτου θυσίας τὴν ἱερουργίαν παρέδωκας ἡμῖν ὡς
Δεσπότης τῶν ἁπάντων. Σὺ γὰρ μόνος, Κύριε ὁ Θεὸς
ἡμῶν, δεσπόζεις τῶν ἐπουρανίων καὶ τῶν ἐπιγείων, ὁ ἐπὶ
θρόνου χερουβικοῦ ἐποχούμενος, ὁ τῶν Σεραφὶμ Κύριος
καὶ βασιλεὺς τοῦ Ἰσραήλ, ὁ μόνος ἅγιος καὶ ἐν ἁγίοις
ἀναπαυόμενος. Σὲ τοίνυν δυσωπῶ τὸν μόνον ἀγαθὸν καὶ
εὐήκοον· ἐπίβλεψον ἐπ’ ἐμὲ τὸν ἁμαρτωλὸν καὶ ἀχρεῖον
δοῦλόν σου καὶ καθάρισόν μου τὴν ψυχὴν καὶ τὴν καρδίαν
ἀπὸ συνειδήσεως πονηρᾶς· καὶ ἱκάνωσόν με τῇ δυνάμει τοῦ
ἁγίου σου Πνεύματος, ἐνδεδυμένον τὴν τῆς ἱερατείας χάριν,
παραστῆναι τῇ ἁγίᾳ σου ταύτῃ τραπέζῃ καὶ ἱερουργῆσαι τὸ
ἅγιον καὶ ἄχραντόν σου Σῶμα καὶ τὸ τίμιον Αἷμα. Σοὶ γὰρ
προσέρχομαι κλίνας τὸν ἐμαυτοῦ αὐχένα καὶ δέομαί σου· μὴ
ἀποστρέψῃς τὸ πρόσωπόν σου ἀπ’ ἐμοῦ, μηδὲ ἀποδοκιμάσῃς
με ἐκ παίδων σου, ἀλλ’ ἀξίωσον προσενεχθῆναί σοι ὑπ’ ἐμοῦ
τοῦ ἁμαρτωλοῦ καὶ ἀναξίου δούλου σου τὰ δῶρα ταῦτα. Σὺ
γὰρ εἶ ὁ προσφέρων καὶ προσφερόμενος καὶ προσδεχόμενος
καὶ διαδιδόμενος, Χριστὲ ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν, καὶ σοὶ τὴν δόξαν
No one bound by carnal desires and pleasures is worthy
to approach, draw near, or minister to You, the King of
Glory. For to serve You is great and awesome even for
the heavenly powers. Yet, because of Your ineffable and
immeasurable love for humankind, You impassibly and
immutably became man. You, as the Master of all, became
our high priest and delivered unto us the sacred service of
this liturgical and bloodless sacrifice. Indeed, Lord our God,
You alone reign over the celestial and the terrestrial; borne
aloft on the cherubic throne, Lord of the Seraphim and King
of Israel, the only holy and resting among the holy ones. I
now beseech You, who alone are good and inclined to hear:
Look down upon me, Your sinful and unprofitable servant,
and cleanse my soul and heart of a wicked conscience.
Vested as I am with the grace of priesthood by the power of
Your Holy Spirit, make me sufficient to stand before Your
holy Table and perform the sacrament of Your holy and pure
Body and Your precious Blood. I come before You, with my
head bowed, and I implore You: Turn not Your face away
from me, nor reject me from among Your children, but make
me, Your sinful and unworthy servant, worthy to offer these
gifts to You. For You are the One who both offers and is
offered, the One who is received and is distributed, O Christ
our God, and to You we offer up glory, and to Your Father,
who is without beginning, and Your all-holy and good and
    ΛΕΙΤΟΥΡΓΙΑ ΜΕΓΑΛΟΥ ΒΑΣΙΛΕΙΟΥ    
    10    
ἀναπέμπομεν σὺν τῷ ἀνάρχῳ σου Πατρὶ καὶ τῷ παναγίῳ καὶ
ἀγαθῷ καὶ ζωοποιῷ σου Πνεύματι, νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς
αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. Ἀμήν.
life-creating Spirit, now and ever and to the ages of ages.
Amen.
Οἱ τὰ Χερουβεὶμ μυστικῶς εἰκονίζοντες καὶ τῇ
ζωοποιῷ Τριάδι τὸν τρισάγιον ὕμνον προσᾴδοντες, πᾶσαν
νῦν βιοτικὴν ἀποθώμεθα μέριμναν, * ὡς τὸν βασιλέα
τῶν ὅλων ὑποδεξόμενοι. Ταῖς ἀγγελικαῖς ἀοράτως
δορυφορούμενον τάξεσιν. Ἀλληλούϊα, ἀλληλούϊα,
ἀλληλούϊα. (3)
Let us, who mystically represent the Cherubim and who
sing the thrice-holy hymn to the life-creating Trinity, now
lay aside every worldly care. * So that we may receive the
King of all. Who is invisibly escorted by the angelic hosts.
Alleluia. Alleluia. Alleluia. (3)
ΔΙΑΚΟΝΟΣ DEACON
Πάντων ὑμῶν μνησθείη Κύριος ὁ Θεὸς ἐν
τῇ βασιλείᾳ αὐτοῦ, πάντοτε, νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς
τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων.
May the Lord God remember all of you in
His kingdom always, now and ever and to the
ages of ages.
ΧΟΡΟΣ· Ἀμήν. CHOIR: Amen.
Ταῖς ἀγγελικαῖς ἀοράτως δορυφορούμενον
τάξεσιν. Ἀλληλούϊα, ἀλληλούϊα, ἀλληλούϊα.
Who is invisibly escorted by the angelic
hosts. Alleluia. Alleluia. Alleluia.
ΤΑ ΠΛΗΡΩΤΙΚΑ LITANY OF COMPLETION
ΔΙΑΚΟΝΟΣ DEACON
Πληρώσωμεν τὴν δέησιν ἡμῶν τῷ Κυρίῳ. Let us complete our prayer to the Lord.
ΧΟΡΟΣ (μεθʼ ἑκάστην δέησιν) CHOIR (after each petition)
Κύριε, ἐλέησον. Lord, have mercy.
ΔΙΑΚΟΝΟΣ DEACON
Ὑπὲρ τῶν προτεθέντων τιμίων δώρων τοῦ
Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν.
For the precious Gifts here presented, let
us pray to the Lord.
Ὑπὲρ τοῦ ἁγίου οἴκου τούτου καὶ τῶν
μετὰ πίστεως, εὐλαβείας καὶ φόβου Θεοῦ
εἰσιόντων ἐν αὐτῷ τοῦ Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν.
For this holy house and for those who
enter it with faith, reverence, and the fear of
God, let us pray to the Lord.
Ὑπὲρ τοῦ ῥυσθῆναι ἡμᾶς ἀπὸ πάσης
θλίψεως, ὀργῆς, κινδύνου καὶ ἀνάγκης τοῦ
Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν.
For our deliverance from all affliction,
wrath, danger, and distress, let us pray to the
Lord.
Ἀντιλαβοῦ, σῶσον, ἐλέησον καὶ
διαφύλαξον ἡμᾶς, ὁ Θεός, τῇ σῇ χάριτι.
Help us, save us, have mercy on us, and
protect us, O God, by Your grace.
Τὴν ἡμέραν πᾶσαν τελείαν, ἁγίαν,
εἰρηνικὴν καὶ ἀναμάρτητον παρὰ τοῦ Κυρίου
αἰτησώμεθα.
That the whole day may be perfect, holy,
peaceful, and sinless, let us ask the Lord.
    LITURGY OF ST. BASIL THE GREAT    
    11    
ΧΟΡΟΣ (μεθʼ ἑκάστην δέησιν) CHOIR (after each petition)
Παράσχου, Κύριε. Grant this, O Lord.
ΔΙΑΚΟΝΟΣ DEACON
Ἄγγελον εἰρήνης, πιστὸν ὁδηγόν, φύλακα
τῶν ψυχῶν καὶ τῶν σωμάτων ἡμῶν παρὰ τοῦ
Κυρίου αἰτησώμεθα.
For an angel of peace, a faithful guide, a
guardian of our souls and bodies, let us ask the
Lord.
Συγγνώμην καὶ ἄφεσιν τῶν ἁμαρτιῶν καὶ
τῶν πλημμελημάτων ἡμῶν παρὰ τοῦ Κυρίου
αἰτησώμεθα.
For pardon and remission of our sins and
transgressions, let us ask the Lord.
Τὰ καλὰ καὶ συμφέροντα ταῖς ψυχαῖς
ἡμῶν καὶ εἰρήνην τῷ κόσμῳ παρὰ τοῦ Κυρίου
αἰτησώμεθα.
For that which is good and beneficial for
our souls, and for peace for the world, let us
ask the Lord.
Τὸν ὑπόλοιπον χρόνον τῆς ζωῆς ἡμῶν
ἐν εἰρήνῃ καὶ μετανοίᾳ ἐκτελέσαι παρὰ τοῦ
Κυρίου αἰτησώμεθα.
That we may complete the remaining time
of our life in peace and repentance, let us ask
the Lord.
Χριστιανὰ τὰ τέλη τῆς ζωῆς ἡμῶν,
ἀνώδυνα, ἀνεπαίσχυντα, εἰρηνικὰ καὶ καλὴν
ἀπολογίαν τὴν ἐπὶ τοῦ φοβεροῦ βήματος τοῦ
Χριστοῦ αἰτησώμεθα.
And let us ask for a Christian end to our
life, peaceful, without shame and suffering,
and for a good defense before the awesome
judgment seat of Christ.
Τῆς παναγίας, ἀχράντου,
ὑπερευλογημένης, ἐνδόξου, δεσποίνης ἡμῶν,
Θεοτόκου καὶ ἀειπαρθένου Μαρίας μετὰ
πάντων τῶν ἁγίων μνημονεύσαντες, ἑαυτοὺς
καὶ ἀλλήλους καὶ πᾶσαν τὴν ζωὴν ἡμῶν
Χριστῷ τῷ Θεῷ παραθώμεθα.
Remembering our all-holy, immaculate,
most blessed, and glorious Lady, the
Theotokos and ever-virgin Mary, with all
the saints, let us commend ourselves and one
another and our whole life to Christ our God.
ΧΟΡΟΣ· Σοί, Κύριε. CHOIR: To You, O Lord.
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ (χαμηλοφώνως) PRIEST (in a low voice)
Η ΕΥΧΗ ΤΗΣ ΠΡΟΣΚΟΜΙΔΗΣ OFFERTORY PRAYER
Κύριε ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν, ὁ κτίσας ἡμᾶς καὶ ἀγαγὼν εἰς
τὴν ζωὴν ταύτην, ὁ ὑποδείξας ἡμῖν ὁδοὺς εἰς σωτηρίαν, ὁ
χαρισάμενος ἡμῖν οὐρανίων μυστηρίων ἀποκάλυψιν· σὺ
εἶ ὁ θέμενος ἡμᾶς εἰς τὴν διακονίαν ταύτην ἐν τῇ δυνάμει
τοῦ Πνεύματός σου τοῦ ἁγίου. Εὐδόκησον δή, Κύριε,
τοῦ γενέσθαι ἡμᾶς διακόνους τῆς καινῆς σου διαθήκης,
λειτουργοὺς τῶν ἁγίων σου μυστηρίων· πρόσδεξαι ἡμᾶς
προσεγγίζοντας τῷ ἁγίῳ σου θυσιαστηρίῳ κατὰ τὸ πλῆθος
τοῦ ἐλέους σου, ἵνα γενώμεθα ἄξιοι τοῦ προσφέρειν σοι
τὴν λογικὴν ταύτην καὶ ἀναίμακτον θυσίαν ὑπὲρ τῶν
Lord our God, You created us and brought us into this
life, showed us ways that lead to salvation, and granted us
revelation of heavenly mysteries. You are the One who by
the power of Your Holy Spirit ordained us to this ministry.
Be indeed well pleased, Lord, that we became ministers of
Your new covenant and celebrants of Your holy sacraments;
and as we approach Your holy Altar of sacrifice, accept us,
in the abundance of Your mercy, and make us worthy to
offer You this rational and bloodless sacrifice for our own
misdeeds and those committed in ignorance by the people.
    ΛΕΙΤΟΥΡΓΙΑ ΜΕΓΑΛΟΥ ΒΑΣΙΛΕΙΟΥ    
    12    
ἡμετέρων ἁμαρτημάτων καὶ τῶν τοῦ λαοῦ ἀγνοημάτων· ἣν
προσδεξάμενος εἰς τὸ ἅγιον καὶ ὑπερουράνιον καὶ νοερόν
σου θυσιαστήριον, εἰς ὀσμὴν εὐωδίας, ἀντικατάπεμψον ἡμῖν
τὴν χάριν τοῦ ἁγίου σου Πνεύματος.
Accept it on Your holy and celestial and spiritual Altar of
sacrifice as a sweet and pleasing aroma, and in return send
down to us the grace of Your Holy Spirit.
Ἐπίβλεψον ἐφ’ ἡμᾶς, ὁ Θεός, καὶ ἔπιδε ἐπὶ τὴν
λατρείαν ἡμῶν ταύτην καὶ πρόσδεξαι αὐτήν, ὡς προσεδέξω
Ἄβελ τὰ δῶρα, Νῶε τὰς θυσίας, Ἀβραὰμ τὰς ὁλοκαρπώσεις,
Μωϋσέως καὶ Ἀαρὼν τὰς ἱερωσύνας, Σαμουὴλ τὰς
εἰρηνικάς. Ὡς προσεδέξω ἐκ τῶν ἁγίων σου ἀποστόλων
τὴν ἀληθινὴν ταύτην λατρείαν, οὕτω καὶ ἐκ τῶν χειρῶν
ἡμῶν τῶν ἁμαρτωλῶν πρόσδεξαι τὰ δῶρα ταῦτα ἐν τῇ
χρηστότητί σου, Κύριε· ἵνα, καταξιωθέντες λειτουργεῖν
ἀμέμπτως τῷ ἁγίῳ σου θυσιαστηρίῳ, εὕρωμεν τὸν μισθὸν
τῶν πιστῶν καὶ φρονίμων οἰκονόμων ἐν τῇ ἡμέρᾳ τῇ φοβερᾷ
τῆς ἀνταποδόσεώς σου τῆς δικαίας.
Look upon us, O God, and have regard for this our
worship, and accept it as You accepted Abel’s offering,
Noah’s sacrifice, Abraham’s whole burnt offering, the
ministrations of Moses and Aaron, and Samuel’s peace
offerings. And as You accepted this true worship from Your
holy Apostles, so also accept these gifts from the hands of
us sinners, in Your goodness, O Lord. May we be granted
to serve at Your holy Altar of sacrifice without blame and
obtain the reward for being faithful and wise stewards on that
fearful day of Your just recompense.
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ PRIEST
Διὰ τῶν οἰκτιρμῶν τοῦ μονογενοῦς σου
Υἱοῦ, μεθ’ οὗ εὐλογητὸς εἶ, σὺν τῷ παναγίῳ
καὶ ἀγαθῷ καὶ ζωοποιῷ σου Πνεύματι, νῦν καὶ
ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων.
Through the mercies of Your only-
begotten Son, with whom You are blessed, and
Your all-holy, good, and life-creating Spirit,
now and ever and to the ages of ages.
ΧΟΡΟΣ· Ἀμήν. CHOIR: Amen.
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ· Εἰρήνη πᾶσι. PRIEST: Peace be with all.
ΧΟΡΟΣ· Καὶ τῷ πνεύματί σου. CHOIR: And with your spirit.
ΔΙΑΚΟΝΟΣ DEACON
Ἀγαπήσωμεν ἀλλήλους, ἵνα ἐν ὁμονοίᾳ
ὁμολογήσωμεν.
Let us love one another, that with oneness
of mind we may confess:
ΧΟΡΟΣ CHOIR
Πατέρα, Υἱὸν καὶ ἅγιον Πνεῦμα, Τριάδα
ὁμοούσιον καὶ ἀχώριστον.
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit: Trinity, one
in essence and undivided.
Ἤ, ἐν συλλειτούργῳ, τὸ ἑξῆς· Or, for concelebrations:
Ἀγαπήσω σε, Κύριε, ἡ ἰσχύς μου. Κύριος στερέωμά
μου καὶ καταφυγή μου καὶ ῥύστης μου.
I will love You, O Lord, my strength. The Lord is my
foundation, my refuge, my deliverer. [SAAS]
ΔΙΑΚΟΝΟΣ DEACON
Τὰς θύρας, τὰς θύρας· ἐν σοφίᾳ
πρόσχωμεν.
The doors! The doors! In wisdom, let us be
attentive!
    LITURGY OF ST. BASIL THE GREAT    
    13    
ΛΑΟΣ PEOPLE
Σύμβολον τῆς Πίστεως The Creed
Πιστεύω εἰς ἕνα Θεόν, Πατέρα,
Παντοκράτορα, ποιητὴν οὐρανοῦ καὶ γῆς,
ὁρατῶν τε πάντων καὶ ἀοράτων. Καὶ εἰς ἕνα
Κύριον Ἰησοῦν Χριστόν, τὸν υἱὸν τοῦ Θεοῦ
τὸν μονογενῆ, τὸν ἐκ τοῦ Πατρὸς γεννηθέντα
πρὸ πάντων τῶν αἰώνων· φῶς ἐκ φωτός, Θεὸν
ἀληθινὸν ἐκ Θεοῦ ἀληθινοῦ, γεννηθέντα
οὐ ποιηθέντα, ὁμοούσιον τῷ Πατρί, διʼ
οὗ τὰ πάντα ἐγένετο. Τὸν διʼ ἡμᾶς τοὺς
ἀνθρώπους καὶ διὰ τὴν ἡμετέραν σωτηρίαν
κατελθόντα ἐκ τῶν οὐρανῶν καὶ σαρκωθέντα
ἐκ Πνεύματος ἁγίου καὶ Μαρίας τῆς Παρθένου
καὶ ἐνανθρωπήσαντα. Σταυρωθέντα τε ὑπὲρ
ἡμῶν ἐπὶ Ποντίου Πιλάτου, καὶ παθόντα καὶ
ταφέντα. Καὶ ἀναστάντα τῇ τρίτῃ ἡμέρᾳ, κατὰ
τὰς Γραφάς. Καὶ ἀνελθόντα εἰς τοὺς οὐρανοὺς
καὶ καθεζόμενον ἐκ δεξιῶν τοῦ Πατρός. Καὶ
πάλιν ἐρχόμενον μετὰ δόξης κρῖναι ζῶντας καὶ
νεκρούς, οὗ τῆς βασιλείας οὐκ ἔσται τέλος.
Καὶ εἰς τὸ Πνεῦμα τὸ ἅγιον, τὸ Κύριον, τὸ
ζωοποιόν, τὸ ἐκ τοῦ Πατρὸς ἐκπορευόμενον,
τὸ σὺν Πατρὶ καὶ Υἱῷ συμπροσκυνούμενον
καὶ συνδοξαζόμενον, τὸ λαλῆσαν διὰ τῶν
προφητῶν. Εἰς μίαν, ἁγίαν, καθολικὴν καὶ
ἀποστολικὴν Ἐκκλησίαν. Ὁμολογῶ ἓν
βάπτισμα εἰς ἄφεσιν ἁμαρτιῶν. Προσδοκῶ
ἀνάστασιν νεκρῶν. Καὶ ζωὴν τοῦ μέλλοντος
αἰῶνος.
I believe in one God, Father Almighty,
Creator of heaven and earth, and of all things
visible and invisible. And in one Lord Jesus
Christ, the only-begotten Son of God, begotten
of the Father before all ages; Light of Light,
true God of true God, begotten, not created, of
one essence with the Father, through Whom
all things were made. Who for us men and for
our salvation came down from heaven and
was incarnate of the Holy Spirit and the Virgin
Mary and became man. He was crucified
for us under Pontius Pilate, and suffered and
was buried; And He rose on the third day,
according to the Scriptures. He ascended into
heaven and is seated at the right hand of the
Father; And He will come again with glory to
judge the living and the dead. His kingdom
shall have no end. And in the Holy Spirit,
the Lord, the Creator of life, Who proceeds
from the Father, Who together with the Father
and the Son is worshiped and glorified, Who
spoke through the prophets. In one, holy,
catholic, and apostolic Church. I confess one
baptism for the forgiveness of sins. I look for
the resurrection of the dead, and the life of the
age to come.
    ΛΕΙΤΟΥΡΓΙΑ ΜΕΓΑΛΟΥ ΒΑΣΙΛΕΙΟΥ    
    14    
ΧΟΡΟΣ· Ἀμήν. CHOIR: Amen.
Η ΑΓΙΑ ΑΝΑΦΟΡΑ HOLY ANAPHORA
ΔΙΑΚΟΝΟΣ DEACON
Στῶμεν καλῶς· στῶμεν μετὰ φόβου·
πρόσχωμεν τὴν ἁγίαν ἀναφορὰν ἐν εἰρήνῃ
προσφέρειν.
Let us stand aright! Let us stand in awe!
Let us be attentive, that we may present the
Holy Offering in peace.
ΧΟΡΟΣ CHOIR
Ἔλεον εἰρήνης, θυσίαν αἰνέσεως. A mercy of peace, a sacrifice of praise.
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ PRIEST
Ἡ χάρις τοῦ Κυρίου ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ
καὶ ἡ ἀγάπη τοῦ Θεοῦ καὶ Πατρὸς καὶ ἡ
κοινωνία τοῦ ἁγίου Πνεύματος εἴη μετὰ
πάντων ὑμῶν.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the
love of God and Father, and the communion of
the Holy Spirit, be with you all.
ΧΟΡΟΣ CHOIR
Καὶ μετὰ τοῦ πνεύματός σου. And with your spirit.
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ PRIEST
Ἄνω σχῶμεν τὰς καρδίας. Let us lift up our hearts.
ΧΟΡΟΣ CHOIR
Ἔχομεν πρὸς τὸν Κύριον. We lift them up to the Lord.
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ PRIEST
Εὐχαριστήσωμεν τῷ Κυρίῳ. Let us give thanks to the Lord.
ΧΟΡΟΣ CHOIR
Ἄξιον καὶ δίκαιον. It is proper and right.
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ (χαμηλοφώνως) PRIEST (in a low voice)
Ὁ ὤν, Δέσποτα, Κύριε Θεέ, Πάτερ παντοκράτορ,
προσκυνητέ, ἄξιον ὡς ἀληθῶς καὶ δίκαιον καὶ πρέπον τῇ
μεγαλοπρεπείᾳ τῆς ἁγιωσύνης σου σὲ αἰνεῖν, σὲ ὑμνεῖν,
σὲ εὐλογεῖν, σὲ προσκυνεῖν, σοὶ εὐχαριστεῖν, σὲ δοξάζειν
τὸν μόνον ὄντως ὄντα Θεόν, καὶ σοὶ προσφέρειν ἐν καρδίᾳ
συντετριμμένῃ καὶ πνεύματι ταπεινώσεως τὴν λογικὴν
ταύτην λατρείαν ἡμῶν· ὅτι σὺ εἶ ὁ χαρισάμενος ἡμῖν τὴν
ἐπίγνωσιν τῆς σῆς ἀληθείας. Καὶ τίς ἱκανὸς λαλῆσαι τὰς
δυναστείας σου, ἀκουστὰς ποιῆσαι πάσας τὰς αἰνέσεις σου ἢ
διηγήσασθαι πάντα τὰ θαυμάσιά σου ἐν παντὶ καιρῶ;
The One Who Is, Master, Lord God, Father, Ruler over
all: You are to be worshiped. Indeed it is proper and right
and fitting the magnificence of Your holiness to praise You,
extol You, bless You, adore You, thank You, and glorify
You, the only God who truly exists, and to offer You this
our rational worship with a broken heart and humble spirit;
for You are the One who granted us the knowledge of Your
truth. And who is sufficient to tell Your mighty deeds and
make all Your praises heard and describe all Your wonders
in every season?
Δέσποτα τῶν ἁπάντων, Κύριε οὐρανοῦ καὶ γῆς καὶ
πάσης κτίσεως, ὁρωμένης τε καὶ οὐχ ὁρωμένης, ὁ καθήμενος
ἐπὶ θρόνου δόξης καὶ ἐπιβλέπων ἀβύσσους, ἄναρχε, ἀόρατε,
Master of all, Lord of heaven and earth and all creation
visible and invisible, who sit upon the throne of glory and
behold the depths, unoriginate, unseen, incomprehensible,
    LITURGY OF ST. BASIL THE GREAT    
    15    
ἀκατάληπτε, ἀπερίγραπτε, ἀναλλοίωτε, ὁ Πατὴρ τοῦ Κυρίου
ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ, τοῦ μεγάλου Θεοῦ καὶ σωτῆρος, τῆς
ἐλπίδος ἡμῶν· ὅς ἐστιν εἰκὼν τῆς σῆς ἀγαθότητος, σφραγὶς
ἰσότυπος, ἐν ἑαυτῷ δεικνὺς σε τὸν Πατέρα, Λόγος ζῶν, Θεὸς
ἀληθινός, ἡ πρὸ αἰώνων σοφία, ζωή, ἁγιασμός, δύναμις, τὸ
φῶς τὸ ἀληθινόν, παρ’ οὗ τὸ Πνεῦμα τὸ ἅγιον ἐξεφάνη, τὸ
τῆς ἀληθείας Πνεῦμα, τὸ τῆς υἱοθεσίας χάρισμα, ὁ ἀῤῥαβὼν
τῆς μελλούσης κληρονομίας, ἡ ἀπαρχὴ τῶν αἰωνίων ἀγαθῶν,
ἡ ζωοποιὸς δύναμις, ἡ πηγὴ τοῦ ἁγιασμοῦ· παρ’ οὗ πᾶσα
κτίσις λογική τε καὶ νοερά δυναμουμένη, σοὶ λατρεύει,
καὶ σοὶ τὴν ἀΐδιον ἀναπέμπει δοξολογίαν, ὅτι τὰ σύμπαντα
δοῦλα σά.
uncircumscribed, unalterable: You are the Father of our
Lord and great God and Savior Jesus Christ, our hope. He
is the image of Your goodness, an exact seal, showing You
the Father in himself; the living Logos, true God, eternal
wisdom, life, sanctification, power, the true light. Through
Him was the Holy Spirit manifested, the Spirit of truth,
the gift of adoption, the pledge of future inheritance, the
firstfruits of the eternal blessings, the life-giving power, the
source of holiness. Through the Spirit are all rational and
spiritual creatures enabled to worship You, and they offer
up perpetual glorification to You, for all things are Your
servants.
Σὲ γὰρ αἰνοῦσιν ἄγγελοι, ἀρχάγγελοι, θρόνοι,
κυριότητες, ἀρχαί, ἐξουσίαι, δυνάμεις καὶ τὰ πολυόμματα
Χερουβίμ· σοὶ παρίστανται κύκλῳ τὰ Σεραφίμ, ἓξ
πτέρυγες τῷ ἑνὶ καὶ ἓξ πτέρυγες τῷ ἑνί· καὶ ταῖς μὲν δυσὶ
κατακαλύπτουσι τὰ πρόσωπα ἑαυτῶν, ταῖς δὲ δυσὶ τοὺς
πόδας καὶ ταῖς δυσὶ πετόμενα, κέκραγεν ἕτερον πρὸς τὸ
ἕτερον ἀκαταπαύστοις στόμασιν, ἀσιγήτοις δοξολογίαις.
And they all praise You, angels, archangels, thrones,
dominions, principalities, authorities, powers, and the many-
eyed cherubim. Around You stand seraphim; each one has
six wings. With two they cover their faces, with two they
cover their feet, and with two they fly. And one cries to
another with unceasing voices and resounding glorification.
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ (ἐκφώνως) PRIEST (aloud)
Τὸν ἐπινίκιον ὕμνον ᾄδοντα, βοῶντα,
κεκραγότα καὶ λέγοντα.
Singing the triumphal hymn, exclaiming,
proclaiming, and saying…
ΧΟΡΟΣ CHOIR
Ἅγιος, ἅγιος, ἅγιος, Κύριος Σαβαώθ·
πλήρης, ὁ οὐρανὸς καὶ ἡ γῆ τῆς δόξης σου.
Ὡσαννά, ἐν τοῖς ὑψίστοις· εὐλογημένος ὁ
ἐρχόμενος ἐν ὀνόματι Κυρίου. Ὡσαννά, ἐν τοῖς
ὑψίστοις.
Holy, holy, holy, Lord Sabaoth, heaven
and earth are filled with Your glory. Hosanna
in the highest. Blessed is He who comes in the
name of the Lord. Hosanna in the highest.
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ (χαμηλοφώνως) PRIEST (in a low voice)
Μετὰ τούτων τῶν μακαρίων δυνάμεων, Δέσποτα
φιλάνθρωπε, καὶ ἡμεῖς οἱ ἁμαρτωλοὶ βοῶμεν καὶ λέγομεν·
ἅγιος εἶ, ὡς ἀληθῶς, καὶ πανάγιος καὶ οὐκ ἔστι μέτρον τῇ
μεγαλοπρεπείᾳ τῆς ἁγιωσύνης σου, καὶ ὅσιος ἐν πᾶσι τοῖς
ἔργοις σου, ὅτι ἐν δικαιοσύνῃ καὶ κρίσει ἀληθινῇ πάντα
ἐπήγαγες ἡμῖν· πλάσας γὰρ τὸν ἄνθρωπον, χοῦν λαβὼν
ἀπὸ τῆς γῆς καὶ εἰκόνι τῇ σῇ, ὁ Θεός, τιμήσας, τέθεικας
αὐτὸν ἐν τῷ παραδείσῳ τῆς τρυφῆς, ἀθανασίαν ζωῆς καὶ
ἀπόλαυσιν αἰωνίων ἀγαθῶν ἐν τῇ τηρήσει τῶν ἐντολῶν
σου ἐπαγγειλάμενος αὐτῷ· ἀλλὰ παρακούσαντα σοῦ τοῦ
ἀληθινοῦ Θεοῦ, τοῦ κτίσαντος αὐτὸν καὶ τῇ ἀπάτῃ τοῦ
ὄφεως ὑπαχθέντα, νεκρωθέντα τε τοῖς οἰκείοις αὐτοῦ
We sinners join these blessed hosts and shout to You
and say, O benevolent Master: Holy are You; indeed, all-
holy, and there is no limit to the magnificence of Your
holiness. And You are upright in all Your works; all that
You have done to us, You have done in righteousness and
true judgment. When You fashioned man from the earth
and honored him with Your image, O God, You placed
him in the Garden of Eden and promised him immortal
life and the enjoyment of eternal blessings if he kept Your
commandments. But he disobeyed You, the true God who
had created him, and he succumbed to the serpent’s deceit,
and he died because of his own offenses; and You, O God,
    ΛΕΙΤΟΥΡΓΙΑ ΜΕΓΑΛΟΥ ΒΑΣΙΛΕΙΟΥ    
    16    
παραπτώμασιν, ἐξωρίσας αὐτὸν ἐν τῇ δικαιοκρισίᾳ σου,
ὁ Θεός, ἐκ τοῦ παραδείσου εἰς τὸν κόσμον τοῦτον, καὶ
ἀπέστρεψας εἰς τὴν γῆν, ἐξ ἧς ἐλήφθη, οἰκονομῶν αὐτῷ τὴν
ἐκ παλιγγενεσίας σωτηρίαν, τὴν ἐν αὐτῷ τῷ Χριστῷ σου.
in Your righteous judgment, expelled him from Paradise to
this world. You returned him to the earth from which he was
taken, and You provided for his salvation by regeneration,
which is in Your Christ.
Οὐ γὰρ ἀπεστράφης τὸ πλάσμα σου εἰς τέλος, ὃ
ἐποίησας, ἀγαθέ, οὐδὲ ἐπελάθου ἔργου χειρῶν σου, ἀλλ’
ἐπεσκέψω πολυτρόπως διὰ σπλάγχνα ἐλέους σου. Προφήτας
ἐξαπέστειλας· ἐποίησας δυνάμεις διὰ τῶν ἁγίων σου, τῶν
καθ’ ἑκάστην γενεὰν εὐαρεστησάντων σοι· ἐλάλησας
ἡμῖν διὰ στόματος τῶν δούλων σου τῶν προφητῶν,
προκαταγγέλλων ἡμῖν τὴν μέλλουσαν ἔσεσθαι σωτηρίαν·
νόμον ἔδωκας εἰς βοήθειαν· ἀγγέλους ἐπέστησας φύλακας.
For You did not forever reject Your creature that You
made, O Good One; You did not forget the work of Your
hands, but rather in Your tender mercy You visited us in
many ways: You sent Prophets; You did signs through Your
saints who pleased You in every generation; You spoke
to us by the mouths of the Your servants the Prophets and
announced to us salvation that was to come; You gave the
Law to help us; You appointed Angels to guard us.
Ὅτε δὲ ἦλθε τὸ πλήρωμα τῶν καιρῶν, ἐλάλησας ἡμῖν
ἐν αὐτῷ τῷ Υἱῷ σου, διʼ οὗ καὶ τοὺς αἰῶνας ἐποίησας· ὅς,
ὢν ἀπάγαυσμα τῆς δόξης σου καὶ χαρακτὴρ τῆς ὑποστάσεώς
σου, φέρων τε τὰ πάντα τῷ ῥήματι τῆς δυνάμεως αὐτοῦ, οὐχ
ἁρπαγμὸν ἡγήσατο τὸ εἶναι ἴσα σοὶ τῷ Θεῷ καὶ Πατρί· ἀλλά,
Θεὸς ὢν προαιώνιος, ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς ὤφθη καὶ τοῖς ἀνθρώποις
συνανεστράφη· καὶ ἐκ Παρθένου ἁγίας σαρκωθείς, ἐκένωσεν
ἑαυτόν, μορφὴν δούλου λαβών, σύμμορφος γενόμενος
τῷ σώματι τῆς ταπεινώσεως ἡμῶν, ἵνα ἡμᾶς συμμόρφους
ποιήσῃ τῆς εἰκόνος τῆς δόξης αὐτοῦ.
And when the time had fully come, You spoke to us
through Your Son, through whom You also created the
world. Since He reflects Your glory and bears the very stamp
of Your nature, and He upholds the universe by His word of
power, He did not count equality with You, God the Father,
a thing to be grasped; but rather being eternal God, He
was seen upon the earth and lived among men. He became
incarnate from a holy Virgin and emptied himself; He took
the form of a servant and became like our lowly body, in
order to make us be like His glorious image.
Ἐπειδὴ γὰρ διʼ ἀνθρώπου ἡ ἁμαρτία εἰσῆλθεν εἰς
τὸν κόσμον καὶ διὰ τῆς ἁμαρτίας ὁ θάνατος, ηὐδόκησεν ὁ
μονογενής σου Υἱός, ὁ ὢν ἐν τοῖς κόλποις σοῦ τοῦ Θεοῦ
καὶ Πατρός, γενόμενος ἐκ γυναικός, τῆς ἁγίας Θεοτόκου
καὶ ἀειπαρθένου Μαρίας, γενόμενος ὑπὸ νόμον, κατακρῖναι
τὴν ἁμαρτίαν ἐν τῇ σαρκὶ αὐτοῦ, ἵνα οἱ ἐν τῷ Ἀδὰμ
ἀποθνήσκοντες ζωοποιηθῶσιν ἐν αὐτῷ τῷ Χριστῷ σου· καὶ
ἐμπολιτευσάμενος τῷ κόσμω τούτῳ, δοὺς προστάγματα
σωτηρίας, ἀποστήσας ἡμᾶς τῆς πλάνης τῶν εἰδώλων,
προσήγαγε τῇ ἐπιγνώσει σοῦ τοῦ ἀληθινοῦ Θεοῦ καὶ Πατρός,
κτησάμενος ἡμᾶς ἑαυτῷ λαὸν περιούσιον, βασίλειον
ἱεράτευμα, ἔθνος ἅγιον· καὶ καθαρίσας ἐν ὕδατι καὶ ἁγιάσας
τῷ Πνεύματι τῷ ἁγίῳ, ἔδωκεν ἑαυτόν ἀντάλλαγμα τῷ
θανάτῳ, ἐν ᾧ κατειχόμεθᾳ πεπραμένοι ὑπὸ τὴν ἁμαρτίαν·
καὶ κατελθὼν διὰ τοῦ σταυροῦ εἰς τὸν ᾅδην, ἵνα πληρώσῃ
ἑαυτοῦ τὰ πάντα, ἔλυσε τὰς ὀδύνας τοῦ θανάτου· καὶ
ἀναστὰς τῇ τρίτῃ ἡμέρᾳ καὶ ὁδοποιήσας πάσῃ σαρκὶ τὴν
ἐκ νεκρῶν ἀνάστασιν, καθότι οὐκ ἦν δυνατὸν κρατεῖσθαι
ὑπὸ τῆς φθορᾶς τὸν ἀρχηγὸν τῆς ζωῆς, ἐγένετο ἀπαρχὴ τῶν
κεκοιμημένων, πρωτότοκος ἐκ τῶν νεκρῶν, ἵνα ᾖ αὐτὸς τὰ
πάντα ἐν πᾶσι πρωτεύων· καὶ ἀνελθὼν εἰς τοὺς οὐρανοὺς
Because sin came into the world through a man and
death through sin, O God and Father, Your only-begotten
Son, who is in Your bosom, was well pleased to be born of a
woman, the holy Theotokos and ever-virgin Mary, to be born
under the law, and to condemn sin in His flesh, so that as in
Adam all die, so also in Him, Your Christ, all be made alive.
Living in this world and leaving saving commandments,
He delivered us from the error of idolatry and led us to the
knowledge of You, the true God and Father; and He acquired
us as His own special people, a royal priesthood, a holy
nation. He cleansed us by water and sanctified us with the
Holy Spirit, and He gave himself as an exchange to death,
by which we were held captive, sold under sin. Through
the cross He descended into the netherworld, so that He
might fill all things with himself, and He loosed the pangs
of death. He rose on the third day and for all flesh opened
the way to resurrection from the dead, as it was not possible
for Him, the Author of life, to be held by corruption. And
thus He became the first fruits of those who have died, the
first-born from the dead, that in everything he might be pre-
eminent. He ascended into heaven and sat at the right hand
    LITURGY OF ST. BASIL THE GREAT    
    17    
ἐκάθισεν ἐν δεξιᾷ τῆς μεγαλωσύνης σου ἐν ὑψηλοῖς· ὃς καὶ
ἥξει ἀποδοῦναι ἑκάστῳ κατὰ τὰ ἔργα αὐτοῦ.
of Your majesty on high; and He will come to render to each,
according to their works.
Κατέλιπε δὲ ἡμῖν ὑπομνήματα τοῦ σωτηρίου αὐτοῦ
πάθους ταῦτα, ἃ προτεθείκαμεν ἐνώπιόν σου, κατὰ τὰς αὐτοῦ
ἐντολάς. Μέλλων γὰρ ἐξιέναι ἐπὶ τὸν ἑκούσιον καὶ ἀοίδιμον
καὶ ζωοποιὸν αὐτοῦ θάνατον, τῇ νυκτὶ ᾗ παρεδίδου ἑαυτὸν
ὑπὲρ τῆς τοῦ κόσμου ζωῆς, λαβὼν ἄρτον ἐπὶ τῶν ἁγίων
αὐτοῦ καὶ ἀχράντων χειρῶν καὶ ἀναδείξας σοὶ τῷ Θεῷ καὶ
Πατρί, εὐχαριστήσας, εὐλογήσας, ἁγιάσας, κλάσας,
He left us with these memorials of His saving Passion,
which we have set before You according to His commands.
When He was about to go to His voluntary, celebrated,
and life-giving death, on the night when He gave himself
up for the life of the world, He took bread in His holy and
immaculate hands, showed it to You, God and Father, and
when He had given thanks, blessed it, hallowed it, and
broken it,
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ (ἐκφώνως) PRIEST (aloud)
Ἔδωκε τοῖς ἁγίοις αὐτοῦ μαθηταῖς καὶ
ἀποστόλοις, εἰπών· Λάβετε, φάγετε· τοῦτό
μού ἐστι τὸ Σῶμα, τὸ ὑπὲρ ὑμῶν κλώμενον εἰς
ἄφεσιν ἁμαρτιῶν.
He gave it to His holy disciples and
apostles, and said, “Take, eat. This is my body
which is broken for you for the forgiveness of
sins.”
ΧΟΡΟΣ· Ἀμήν. CHOIR: Amen.
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ (χαμηλοφώνως) PRIEST (in a low voice)
Ὁμοίως καὶ τὸ ποτήριον ἐκ τοῦ γεννήματος τῆς
ἀμπέλου λαβών, κεράσας, εὐχαριστήσας, εὐλογήσας,
ἁγιάσας,
In the same way He also took the cup of the fruit of the
vine and mingled it, when He had given thanks, blessed it,
and hallowed it,
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ (ἐκφώνως) PRIEST (aloud)
Ἔδωκε τοῖς ἁγίοις αὐτοῦ μαθηταῖς
καὶ ἀποστόλοις, εἰπών· Πίετε ἐξ αὐτοῦ
πάντες· τοῦτό ἐστι τὸ Αἷμα μου, τὸ τῆς
καινῆς διαθήκης, τὸ ὑπὲρ ὑμῶν καὶ πολλῶν
ἐκχυνόμενον εἰς ἄφεσιν ἁμαρτιῶν.
He gave it to His holy disciples and
apostles and said, “Drink of this, all of you.
This is my blood of the new covenant, which is
shed for you and for many, for the forgiveness
of sins.
ΧΟΡΟΣ· Ἀμήν. CHOIR: Amen.
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ (χαμηλοφώνως) PRIEST (in a low voice)
Τοῦτο ποιεῖτε εἰς τὴν ἐμὴν ἀνάμνησιν· ὁσάκις γὰρ ἂν
ἐσθίητε τὸν ἄρτον τοῦτον καὶ τὸ ποτήριον τοῦτο πίνητε,
τὸν ἐμὸν θάνατον καταγγέλλετε καὶ τὴν ἐμὴν ἀνάστασιν
ὁμολογεῖτε. Μεμνημένοι οὖν, Δέσποτα, καὶ ἡμεῖς τῶν
σωτηρίων αὐτοῦ παθημάτων, τοῦ ζωοποιοῦ σταυροῦ,
τῆς τριημέρου ταφῆς, τῆς ἐκ νεκρῶν ἀναστάσεως, τῆς εἰς
οὐρανοὺς ἀνόδου, τῆς ἐκ δεξιῶν σοῦ τοῦ Θεοῦ καὶ Πατρὸς
καθέδρας καὶ τῆς ἐνδόξου καὶ φοβερᾶς δευτέρας αὐτοῦ
παρουσίας,
“Do this in remembrance of me. For as often as you
eat this bread and drink this cup, you proclaim My death,
and you confess My resurrection.” Therefore, O Master, as
we also now remember His saving Passion, His life-giving
crucifixion, His three-day burial, His resurrection from the
dead, His ascent into heaven, His seating on the right hand of
You, God the Father, and His glorious and awesome Second
Coming,
    ΛΕΙΤΟΥΡΓΙΑ ΜΕΓΑΛΟΥ ΒΑΣΙΛΕΙΟΥ    
    18    
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ (ἐκφώνως) PRIEST (aloud)
Τὰ σὰ ἐκ τῶν σῶν σοὶ προσφέρομεν κατὰ
πάντα καὶ διὰ πάντα.
Your own of Your own we offer to You, in
all and for all.
ΧΟΡΟΣ CHOIR
Σὲ ὑμνοῦμεν, σὲ εὐλογοῦμεν, σοὶ
εὐχαριστοῦμεν, Κύριε, καὶ δεόμεθά σου, ὁ
Θεὸς ἡμῶν.
We praise You. We bless You. We give
thanks to You, O Lord; and we pray to You,
our God.
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ (χαμηλοφώνως) PRIEST (in a low voice)
Διὰ τοῦτο, Δέσποτα πανάγιε, καὶ ἡμεῖς οἱ ἁμαρτωλοὶ
καὶ ἀνάξιοι δοῦλοί σου, οἱ καταξιωθέντες λειτουργεῖν τῷ
ἁγίῳ σου θυσιαστηρίῳ, οὐ διὰ τὰς δικαιοσύνας ἡμῶν, οὐ
γὰρ ἐποιήσαμέν τι ἀγαθὸν ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς, ἀλλὰ διὰ τὰ ἐλέη σου
καὶ τοὺς οἰκτιρμούς σου, οὓς ἐξέχεας πλουσίως ἐφʼ ἡμᾶς,
θαῤῥοῦντες προσεγγίζομεν τῷ ἁγίῳ σου θυσιαστηρίῳ· καὶ
προθέντες τὰ ἀντίτυπα τοῦ ἁγίου Σώματος καὶ Αἵματος
τοῦ Χριστοῦ σου, σοῦ δεόμεθα καὶ σὲ παρακαλοῦμεν, ἅγιε
ἁγίων, εὐδοκίᾳ τῆς σῆς ἀγαθότητος ἐλθεῖν τὸ Πνεῦμά σου
τὸ ἅγιον ἐφʼ ἡμᾶς καὶ ἐπὶ τὰ προκείμενα δῶρα ταῦτα καὶ
εὐλογῆσαι αὐτὰ καὶ ἁγιάσαι καὶ ἀναδεῖξαι·
All-holy Master, we approach Your holy Altar of
sacrifice with confidence, even we Your sinful and unworthy
servants, who are allowed to liturgize at Your holy Altar of
sacrifice, not because of any virtue of ours, since we have
done nothing good on earth, but because of Your mercies and
tender love that You richly poured on us. And we present
the elements that will become the holy Body and Blood of
Your Christ, and we pray You and implore You, O Holy of
holies, that by Your benevolent good pleasure Your Holy
Spirit come upon us and these gifts here presented, and that
He bless them and hallow them,
ΔΙΑΚΟΝΟΣ  (χαμηλοφώνως) DEACON  (in a low voice)
Εὐλόγησον, δέσποτα, τὸν ἅγιον Ἄρτον. Bless, Master, the Holy Bread.
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ PRIEST
Τὸν μὲν Ἄρτον τοῦτον αὐτὸ τὸ τίμιον Σῶμα τοῦ
Κυρίου καὶ Θεοῦ καὶ Σωτῆρος ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ.
and make this bread be the precious Body of our Lord
God and Savior Jesus Christ,
ΔΙΑΚΟΝΟΣ DEACON
Ἀμήν. Amen.
Εὐλόγησον, δέσποτα, τὸ ἅγιον ποτήριον. Bless, Master, the holy Cup.
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ PRIEST
Τὸ δὲ ποτήριον τοῦτον αὐτὸ τὸ τίμιον Αἷμα τοῦ Κυρίου
καὶ Θεοῦ καὶ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ.
and this cup be the precious Blood of our Lord God and
Savior Jesus Christ,
ΔΙΑΚΟΝΟΣ DEACON
Ἀμήν. Amen.
Εὐλόγησον, δέσποτα, ἀμφότερα τὰ ἅγια. Bless, Master, both the Holy Gifts.
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ PRIEST
Τὸ ἐκχυθὲν ὑπὲρ τῆς τοῦ κόσμου ζωῆς καὶ σωτηρίας. which was shed for the life and salvation of the world.
ΔΙΑΚΟΝΟΣ DEACON
    LITURGY OF ST. BASIL THE GREAT    
    19    
Ἀμήν. Ἀμήν. Ἀμήν. Amen. Amen. Amen.
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ PRIEST
Ἡμᾶς δὲ πάντας, τοὺς ἐκ τοῦ ἑνὸς ἄρτου καὶ
τοῦ ποτηρίου μετέχοντας, ἑνώσαις ἀλλήλοις εἰς ἑνὸς
Πνεύματος ἁγίου κοινωνίαν καὶ μηδένα ἡμῶν εἰς κρῖμα
ἢ εἰς κατάκριμα ποιήσαις μετασχεῖν τοῦ ἁγίου Σώματος
καὶ Αἵματος τοῦ Χριστοῦ σου· ἀλλʼ ἵνα εὕρωμεν ἔλεον
καὶ χάριν μετὰ πάντων τῶν ἁγίων τῶν ἀπʼ αἰῶνός σοι
εὐαρεστησάντων, προπατόρων, πατέρων, πατριαρχῶν,
προφητῶν, ἀποστόλων, κηρύκων, εὐαγγελιστῶν, μαρτύρων,
ὁμολογητῶν, διδασκάλων καὶ παντὸς πνεύματος δικαίου ἐν
πίστει τετελειωμένου.
We also pray You will unite us all who partake of the
one bread and cup to one another, in the communion of
the one Holy Spirit. And please let none of us partake of
the holy Body and Blood of Your Christ unto judgment or
condemnation; but rather may we obtain mercy and grace
with all the saints who throughout the ages have pleased
You, the ancestors, forefathers, patriarchs, prophets, apostles,
preachers, evangelists, martyrs, confessors, teachers, and
every righteous spirit departed in faith.
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ (ἐκφώνως) PRIEST (aloud)
Ἐξαιρέτως τῆς παναγίας, ἀχράντου,
ὑπερευλογημένης, ἐνδόξου, δεσποίνης ἡμῶν,
Θεοτόκου καὶ ἀειπαρθένου Μαρίας.
Especially our most holy, pure, blessed,
and glorious Lady, the Theotokos and ever-
virgin Mary.
ΧΟΡΟΣ CHOIR
Ὗμνον τῆς Θεοτόκου Hymn to the Theotokos
(Δείτε τά μεταβλητά.) (See Liturgy Variables.)
 
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ (χαμηλοφώνως) PRIEST (in a low voice)
Τοῦ ἁγίου Ἰωάννου, προφήτου, προδρόμου καὶ
βαπτιστοῦ· τῶν ἁγίων ἐνδόξων καὶ πανευφήμων ἀποστόλων·
[τοῦ ἁγίου (δεῖνος), οὗ καὶ τὴν μνήμην ἐπιτελοῦμεν] καὶ
πάντων σου τῶν ἁγίων, ὧν ταῖς ἱκεσίαις ἐπίσκεψαι ἡμᾶς, ὁ
Θεός.
And also with the holy prophet, forerunner, and baptist
John, the holy, glorious, and all-lauded Apostles; [the saint
whose memory we celebrate] and all Your saints, at whose
entreaties visit us, O God.
Καὶ μνήσθητι πάντων τῶν προκεκοιμημένων ἐπʼ ἐλπίδι
ἀναστάσεως ζωῆς αἰωνίου (μνημονεύει ἐνταῦθα καὶ ὧν
βούλεται τεθνεώτων) καὶ ἀνάπαυσον αὐτούς, ὅπου ἐπισκοπεῖ
τὸ φῶς τοῦ προσώπου σου.
Also remember all who have fallen asleep in the hope
of resurrection to eternal life [here the priest commemorates
the names of the deceased], and grant them rest where the
light of Your face is beaming.
Ἔτι σοῦ δεόμεθα· μνήσθητι, Κύριε, τῆς ἁγίας,
καθολικῆς καὶ ἀποστολικῆς Ἐκκλησίας, τῆς ἀπὸ περάτων
ἕως περάτων τῆς οἰκουμένης, καὶ εἰρήνευσον αὐτήν, ἣν
περιεποιήσω τῷ τιμίῳ Αἵματι τοῦ Χριστοῦ σου, καὶ τὸν
ἅγιον οἶκον τοῦτον στερέωσον μέχρι τῆς συντελείας τοῦ
αἰῶνος.
Furthermore, we pray You, Lord, remember the holy,
catholic, and apostolic Church, which is throughout the
world, and which You obtained with the precious blood of
Your Christ, and give her peace. And also reinforce this holy
church building until the end of time.
Μνήσθητι, Κύριε, τῶν τὰ δῶρά σοι ταῦτα
προσκομισάντων καὶ ὑπὲρ ὧν καὶ διʼ ὧν καὶ ἐφʼ οἷς αὐτὰ
προσεκόμισαν. Μνήσθητι, Κύριε, τῶν καρποφορούντων
καὶ καλλιεργούντων ἐν ταῖς ἁγίαις σου Ἐκκλησίαις καὶ
μεμνημένων τῶν πενήτων. Ἄμειψαι αὐτοὺς τοῖς πλουσίοις
Remember, O Lord, those who brought You these
gifts, and those for whom and through whom they offered
them, and their requests. Remember, O Lord, those who
bear fruit and do good works in Your holy churches and
who remember the poor. Please reward them with Your rich
    ΛΕΙΤΟΥΡΓΙΑ ΜΕΓΑΛΟΥ ΒΑΣΙΛΕΙΟΥ    
    20    
σου καὶ ἐπουρανίοις χαρίσμασι· χάρισαι αὐτοῖς ἀντὶ τῶν
ἐπιγείων τὰ ἐπουράνια, ἀντὶ τῶν προσκαίρων τὰ αἰώνια, ἀντὶ
τῶν φθαρτῶν τὰ ἄφθαρτα. Μνήσθητι, Κύριε, τῶν ἐν ἐρημίαις
καὶ ὄρεσι καὶ σπηλαίοις καὶ ταῖς ὀπαῖς τῆς γῆς. Μνήσθητι,
Κύριε, τῶν ἐν παρθενίᾳ καὶ εὐλαβείᾳ καὶ ἀσκήσει καὶ σεμνῇ
πολιτείᾳ διαγόντων.
and heavenly gifts. In return for transient and perishable
things on earth, grant them eternal and imperishable things in
heaven. Remember, O Lord, those who dwell in deserts and
on mountains, and in dens and caves of the earth. Remember,
O Lord, those who lead a celibate life in chastity, godliness,
and asceticism.
Μνήσθητι, Κύριε, τῶν εὐσεβεστάτων καὶ πιστοτάτων
ἡμῶν βασιλέων, οὓς ἐδικαίωσας βασιλεύειν ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς·
ὅπλῳ ἀληθείας, ὅλῳ εὐδοκίας στεφάνωσον αὐτούς·
ἐπισκίασον ἐπὶ τὴν κεφαλὴν αὐτῶν ἐν ἡμέρᾳ πολέμου·
ἐνίσχυσον αὐτῶν τὸν βραχοίονα· ὕψωσον αὐτῶν τὴν δεξιάν·
κράτυνον αὐτῶν τὴν βασιλείαν· ὑπόταξον αὐτοῖς πάντα τὰ
βάρβαρα ἔθνη τὰ τοὺς πολέμους θέλοντα· χάρισαι αὐτοῖς
βαθεῖαν καὶ ἀναφαίρετον εἰρήνην· λάλησον εἰς τὴν καρδίαν
αὐτῶν ἀγαθὰ ὑπὲρ τῆς Ἐκκλησίας σου καὶ παντὸς τοῦ
λαοῦ σου· ἵνα ἐν τῇ γαλήνῃ αὐτῶν ἤρεμον καὶ ἡσύχιον
βίον διάγωμεν, ἐν πάσῃ εὐσεβείᾳ καὶ σεμνότητι. Μνήσθητι,
Κύριε, πάσης ἀρχης καὶ ἐξουσίας καὶ τῶν ἐν τῷ παλατίῳ
ἀδελφῶν ἡμῶν καὶ παντὸς τοῦ στρατοπέδου. Τοὺς ἀγαθοὺς
ἐν τῇ ἀγαθότητί σου διατήρησον· τοὺς πονηροὺς ἀγαθοὺς
ποίησον ἐν τῇ χρηστότητί σου.
Remember, O Lord, our elected officials, whom you
have allowed to govern on earth. Arm our government with
truth, and cover it with favor as with a shield. Overshadow
our country in the day of war. Strengthen our armed forces,
and exalt their right hand. Establish our country, and subdue
all foreign enemies that seek war. Speak good things in their
hearts regarding Your Church and all Your people, so that
they may conduct their duties in tranquility and we may live
a quiet and peaceful life in all piety and propriety. And grant
our country profound and lasting peace. Remember, O Lord,
everyone who is in government, and all our brethren who are
civil servants and who serve in the military. Keep the good in
Your goodness; and in Your kindness, make the bad be good.
Μνήσθητι, Κύριε, τοῦ περιεστῶτος λαοῦ καὶ τῶν
διʼ εὐλόγους αἰτίας ἀπολειφθέντων καὶ ἐλέησον αὐτοὺς
καὶ ἡμᾶς κατὰ τὸ πλῆθος τοῦ ἐλέους σου. Τὰ ταμεῖα
αὐτῶν ἔμπλησον παντὸς ἀγαθοῦ· τὰς συζυγίας αὐτῶν
ἐν εἰρήνῃ καὶ ὁμονοίᾳ διατήρησον· τὰ νήπια ἔκθρεψον·
τὴν νεότητα παιδαγώγησον· τὸ γῆρας περικράτησον·
τοὺς ὀλιγοψύχους παραμύθησαι· τοὺς ἐσκορπισμένους
ἐπισυνάγαγε· τοὺς πεπλανημένους ἐπανάγαγε καὶ σύναψον
τῇ ἁγίᾳ σου καθολικῇ καὶ ἀποστολικῇ Ἐκκλησίᾳ. Τοὺς
ὀχλουμένους ὑπὸ πνευμάτων ἀκαθάρτων ἐλευθέρωσον·
τοῖς πλέουσι σύμπλευσον· τοῖς ὁδοιποροῦσι συνόδευσον·
χηρῶν πρόστηθι· ὀρφανῶν ὑπεράσπισον· αἰχμαλώτους
ῥῦσαι· νοσοῦντας ἴασαι. Τῶν ἐν βήμασι καὶ μετάλλοις καὶ
ἐξορίαις καὶ πικραῖς δουλείαις καὶ πάσῃ θλίψει καὶ ἀνάγκῃ
καὶ περιστάσει ὄντων μνημόνευσον, ὁ Θεός, καὶ πάντων
τῶν δεομένων τῆς μεγάλης σου εὐσπλαγχνίας· καὶ τῶν
ἀγαπώντων ἡμᾶς καὶ τῶν μισούντων καὶ τῶν ἐντειλαμένων
ἡμῖν τοῖς ἀναξίοις εὔχεσθαι ὑπὲρ αὐτῶν. Καὶ παντὸς τοῦ
λαοῦ σου μνήσθητι, Κύριε ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν, καὶ ἐπὶ πάντας
ἔκχεον τὸ πλούσιόν σου ἔλεος, πᾶσι παρέχων τὰ πρὸς
σωτηρίαν αἰτήματα. Καὶ ὧν ἡμεῖς οὐκ ἐμνημονεύσαμεν διʼ
ἄγνοιαν ἢ λήθην ἢ πλῆθος ὀνομάτων, αὐτὸς μνημόνευσον, ὁ
Remember, O Lord, the people here present and those
who are absent with good cause. Have mercy on them and
on us, according to the abundance of Your mercy. Fill their
shelves with goods; preserve their marriages in peace and
harmony; nurture the infants; instruct the youth; support the
elderly; encourage the fainthearted; reunite the dispersed;
return those who succumbed to error and unite them to Your
holy, catholic, and apostolic Church. Free those who are
troubled by unclean spirits. Travel with those who travel.
Defend the widows; protect the orphans; free the captives;
heal the sick. Remember, O Lord, those who are on trial, in
labor camps, in exile, in bitter servitude, and any affliction,
necessity, or distress, and everyone in need of Your great
compassion; and those who love us and those who hate us;
those who have asked us to pray for them, unworthy though
we may be. Remember, O Lord our God, all Your people,
and pour out Your rich mercy on all of them, and grant
everyone their requests that contribute to their salvation.
Remember, O God, everyone whom we have failed to
commemorate, either through ignorance or omission or
because of the many names, since You know the name and
age of each, even from their mother’s womb.
    LITURGY OF ST. BASIL THE GREAT    
    21    
Θεός, ὁ εἰδὼς ἑκάστου τὴν ἡλικίαν καὶ τὴν προσηγορίαν, ὁ
εἰδὼς ἕκαστον ἐκ κοιλίας μητρὸς αὐτοῦ.
Σὺ γὰρ εἶ, Κύριε, ἡ βοήθεια τῶν ἀβοηθήτων, ἡ ἐλπὶς
τῶν ἀπηλπισμένων, ὁ τῶν χειμαζομένων σωτήρ, ὁ τῶν
πλεόντων λιμήν, ὁ τῶν νοσούντων ἰατρός. Αὐτὸς τοῖς πᾶσι
τὰ πάντα γενοῦ, ὁ εἰδὼς ἕκαστον καὶ τὸ αἴτημα αὐτοῦ, οἶκον
καὶ τὴν χρείαν αὐτοῦ. Ῥῦσαι, Κύριε, τὴν πόλιν (ἢ τὴν ἁγίαν
μονὴν) ταύτην καὶ πᾶσαν πόλιν καὶ χώραν ἀπὸ λοιμοῦ,
λιμοῦ, σεισμοῦ, καταποντισμοῦ, πυρός, μαχαίρας, ἐπιδρομῆς
ἀλλοφύλων καὶ ἐμφυλίου πολέμου.
For You, O Lord, are the help of the helpless, the hope
of the hopeless, the savior of those in trouble, the port for
travelers, and the physician of the sick. Be all things to all
people, for You know everyone, what they seek, where they
live, and what they need. Lord, deliver this city and every
city and town from famine, pandemic, earthquake, flood, fire,
criminal violence, foreign invasion, and civil war.
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ (ἐκφώνως) PRIEST (aloud)
Ἐν πρώτοις μνήσθητι, Κύριε, τοῦ
Ἀρχιεπισκόπου ἡμῶν (δεῖνος).  ὃν χάρισαι
ταῖς ἁγίαις σου Ἐκκλησίαις ἐν εἰρήνῃ,
σῷον, ἔντιμον, ὑγιᾶ, μακροημερεύοντα καὶ
ὀρθοτομοῦντα τὸν λόγον τῆς σῆς ἀληθείας.
Among the first remember, Lord, our
Archbishop (name).  grant him to Your holy
churches in peace, safety, honor, and health,
unto length of days, rightly teaching the word
of Your truth.
ΧΟΡΟΣ· Κύριε, ἐλέησον. CHOIR: Lord, have mercy.
ΔΙΑΚΟΝΟΣ DEACON
Καὶ ὧν ἕκαστος κατὰ διάνοιαν ἔχει, καὶ
πάντων καὶ πασῶν.
And remember those whom each one of us
has in mind, and all the people.
ΧΟΡΟΣ· Κύριε, ἐλέησον. CHOIR: Lord, have mercy.
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ (χαμηλοφώνως) PRIEST (in a low voice)
Μνήσθητι, Κύριε, πάσης ἐπισκοπῆς ὀρθοδόξων, τῶν
ὀρθοτομούντων τὸν λόγον τῆς σῆς ἀληθείας. Μνήσθητι,
Κύριε, κατὰ τὸ πλῆθος τῶν οἰκτιρμῶν σου καὶ τῆς ἐμῆς
ἀναξιότητος· συγχώρησόν μοι πᾶν πλημμέλημα ἑκούσιόν
τε καὶ ἀκούσιον· καὶ μὴ διὰ τὰς ἐμὰς ἁμαρτίας κωλύσῃς
τὴν χάριν τοῦ ἁγίου σου Πνεύματος ἀπὸ τῶν προκειμένων
δώρων. Μνήσθητι, Κύριε, τοῦ πρεσβυτερίου, τῆς ἐν Χριστῷ
διακονίας καὶ παντὸς ἱερατικοῦ τάγματος· καὶ μηδένα ἡμῶν
καταισχύνῃς τῶν κυκλούντων τὸ ἅγιόν σου θυσιαστήριον.
Remember, O Lord, all Orthodox bishops who rightly
teach the word of Your truth. And in the abundance of Your
tender mercies, O Lord, remember me, who am unworthy.
Forgive my every transgression, voluntary and involuntary.
And please do not withhold the grace of Your Holy Spirit
from these gifts on account of my sins. Remember, O Lord,
the priests, the deacons in Christ, and all the clergy. Let none
of us surrounding Your holy Altar of sacrifice be disgraced.
Ἐπίσκεψαι ἡμᾶς ἐν τῇ χρηστότητί σου, Κύριε
ἐπιφάνηθι ἡμῖν ἐν τοῖς πλουσίοις σου οἰκτιρμοῖς· εὐκράτους
καὶ ἐπωφελεῖς τοὺς ἀέρας ἡμῖν χάρισαι· ὄμβρους εἰρηνικοὺς
τῇ γῇ πρὸς καρποφορίαν δώρησαι· εὐλόγησον τὸν στέφανον
τοῦ ἐνιαυτοῦ τῆς χρηστότητός σου. Παῦσον τὰ σχίσματα
τῶν Ἐκκλησιῶν· σβέσον τὰ φρυάγματα τῶν ἐθνῶν· τὰς
τῶν αἱρέσεων ἐπαναστάσεις ταχέως κατάλυσον τῇ δυνάμει
τοῦ ἁγίου σου Πνεύματος. Πάντας ἡμᾶς πρόσδεξαι εἰς τὴν
βασιλείαν σου, υἱοὺς φωτὸς καὶ υἱοὺς ἡμέρας ἀναδείξας. Τὴν
Visit us in Your goodness, O Lord; reveal Yourself
to us in Your rich and tender mercies. Grant our weather to
be temperate and beneficial; send gentle rains to the earth
so that it may be fruitful; bless the crown of the year with
Your goodness. End the schisms of churches; extinguish the
insolence of nations; bring outbreaks of heresy to a quick
end, by the power of Your Holy Spirit. Make us children
of the light and of the day, and receive us all into Your
kingdom. Grant us Your peace and Your love, O Lord our
God. Indeed You have given us everything.
    ΛΕΙΤΟΥΡΓΙΑ ΜΕΓΑΛΟΥ ΒΑΣΙΛΕΙΟΥ    
    22    
σὴν εἰρήνην καὶ τὴν σὴν ἀγάπην χάρισαι ἡμῖν, Κύριε ὁ Θεὸς
ἡμῶν· πάντα γὰρ ἀπέδωκας ἡμῖν.
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ (ἐκφώνως) PRIEST (aloud)
Καὶ δὸς ἡμῖν ἐν ἑνὶ στόματι καὶ μιᾷ
καρδίᾳ δοξάζειν καὶ ἀνυμνεῖν τὸ πάντιμον καὶ
μεγαλοπρεπὲς ὄνομά σου, τοῦ Πατρὸς καὶ τοῦ
Υἱοῦ καὶ τοῦ ἁγίου Πνεύματος, νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ
εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων.
And grant that with one voice and one
heart we may glorify and praise Your most
honorable and majestic name, of the Father and
the Son and the Holy Spirit, now and ever and
to the ages of ages.
ΧΟΡΟΣ· Ἀμήν. CHOIR: Amen.
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ PRIEST
Καὶ ἔσται τὰ ἐλέη τοῦ μεγάλου Θεοῦ καὶ
σωτῆρος ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ μετὰ πάντων
ὑμῶν.
And the mercies of our great God and
Savior, Jesus Christ, be with you all.
ΧΟΡΟΣ CHOIR
Καὶ μετὰ τοῦ πνεύματός σου. And with your spirit.
Η ΚΥΡΙΑΚΗ ΠΡΟΣΕΥΧΗ THE LORD’S PRAYER
ΔΙΑΚΟΝΟΣ DEACON
Πάντων τῶν ἁγίων μνημονεύσαντες, ἔτι
καὶ ἔτι ἐν εἰρήνῃ τοῦ Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν.
Having commemorated all the saints, again
and again, in peace, let us pray to the Lord.
ΧΟΡΟΣ· Κύριε, ἐλέησον. CHOIR: Lord, have mercy.
ΔΙΑΚΟΝΟΣ DEACON
Ὑπὲρ τῶν προσκομισθέντων καὶ
ἁγιασθέντων τιμίων δώρων τοῦ Κυρίου
δεηθῶμεν.
For the precious Gifts here presented and
consecrated, let us pray to the Lord.
ΧΟΡΟΣ· Κύριε, ἐλέησον. CHOIR: Lord, have mercy.
ΔΙΑΚΟΝΟΣ DEACON
Ὅπως ὁ φιλάνθρωπος Θεὸς ἡμῶν,
ὁ προσδεξάμενος αὐτὰ εἰς τὸ ἅγιον
καὶ ὑπερουράνιον καὶ νοερὸν αὐτοῦ
θυσιαστήριον εἰς ὀσμὴν εὐωδίας πνευματικῆς,
ἀντικαταπέμψῃ ἡμῖν τὴν θείαν χάριν καὶ τὴν
δωρεὰν τοῦ ἁγίου Πνεύματος δεηθῶμεν.
That our benevolent God, having accepted
them at His holy and celestial and mystical
altar as an offering of spiritual fragrance, may
in return send down upon us the divine grace
and the gift of the Holy Spirit, let us pray.
ΧΟΡΟΣ· Κύριε, ἐλέησον. CHOIR: Lord, have mercy.
 
    LITURGY OF ST. BASIL THE GREAT    
    23    
Δείξε Αἰτήσεις Show Petitions 
__________ __________
(Τὰ Πληρωτικά, λεχθέντα καὶ πρότερον, ὀρθῶς
παραλείπονται συνήθως σήμερον.)
(The rest of this litany, which was previously said
above, is nowadays usually and correctly omitted.)
ΔΙΑΚΟΝΟΣ DEACON
Ὑπὲρ τοῦ ῥυσθῆναι ἡμᾶς ἀπὸ πάσης θλίψεως, ὀργῆς,
κινδύνου καὶ ἀνάγκης τοῦ Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν.
For our deliverance from all affliction, wrath, danger,
and distress, let us pray to the Lord.
ΧΟΡΟΣ CHOIR
Κύριε, ἐλέησον. Lord, have mercy.
ΔΙΑΚΟΝΟΣ DEACON
Ἀντιλαβοῦ, σῶσον, ἐλέησον καὶ διαφύλαξον ἡμᾶς, ὁ
Θεός, τῇ σῇ χάριτι.
Help us, save us, have mercy on us, and protect us, O
God, by Your grace.
ΧΟΡΟΣ CHOIR
Κύριε, ἐλέησον. Lord, have mercy.
ΔΙΑΚΟΝΟΣ DEACON
Τὴν ἡμέραν πᾶσαν τελείαν, ἁγίαν, εἰρηνικὴν καὶ
ἀναμάρτητον παρὰ τοῦ Κυρίου αἰτησώμεθα.
That the whole day may be perfect, holy, peaceful, and
sinless, let us ask the Lord.
ΧΟΡΟΣ (μεθʼ ἑκάστην δέησιν) CHOIR (after each petition)
Παράσχου, Κύριε. Grant this, O Lord.
ΔΙΑΚΟΝΟΣ DEACON
Ἄγγελον εἰρήνης, πιστὸν ὁδηγόν, φύλακα τῶν ψυχῶν
καὶ τῶν σωμάτων ἡμῶν παρὰ τοῦ Κυρίου αἰτησώμεθα.
For an angel of peace, a faithful guide, a guardian of
our souls and bodies, let us ask the Lord.
Συγγνώμην καὶ ἄφεσιν τῶν ἁμαρτιῶν καὶ τῶν
πλημμελημάτων ἡμῶν παρὰ τοῦ Κυρίου αἰτησώμεθα.
For pardon and remission of our sins and
transgressions, let us ask the Lord.
Τὰ καλὰ καὶ συμφέροντα ταῖς ψυχαῖς ἡμῶν καὶ εἰρήνην
τῷ κόσμῳ παρὰ τοῦ Κυρίου αἰτησώμεθα.
For that which is good and beneficial for our souls, and
for peace for the world, let us ask the Lord.
Τὸν ὑπόλοιπον χρόνον τῆς ζωῆς ἡμῶν ἐν εἰρήνῃ καὶ
μετανοίᾳ ἐκτελέσαι παρὰ τοῦ Κυρίου αἰτησώμεθα.
That we may complete the remaining time of our life in
peace and repentance, let us ask the Lord.
Χριστιανὰ τὰ τέλη τῆς ζωῆς ἡμῶν, ἀνώδυνα,
ἀνεπαίσχυντα, εἰρηνικὰ καὶ καλὴν ἀπολογίαν τὴν ἐπὶ τοῦ
φοβεροῦ βήματος τοῦ Χριστοῦ αἰτησώμεθα.
And let us ask for a Christian end to our life, peaceful,
without shame and suffering, and for a good defense before
the awesome judgment seat of Christ.
__________ __________
Κρύψε Αἰτήσεις Hide Petitions 
 
Τὴν ἑνότητα τῆς πίστεως καὶ τὴν
κοινωνίαν τοῦ ἁγίου Πνεύματος αἰτησάμενοι,
ἑαυτοὺς καὶ ἀλλήλους καὶ πᾶσαν τὴν ζωὴν
ἡμῶν Χριστῷ τῷ Θεῷ παραθώμεθα.
Having asked for the unity of the faith and
for the communion of the Holy Spirit, let us
commend ourselves and one another and our
whole life to Christ our God.
    ΛΕΙΤΟΥΡΓΙΑ ΜΕΓΑΛΟΥ ΒΑΣΙΛΕΙΟΥ    
    24    
ΧΟΡΟΣ· Σοί, Κύριε. CHOIR: To You, O Lord.
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ (χαμηλοφώνως) PRIEST (in a low voice)
Ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν, ὁ Θεὸς τοῦ σώζειν, σὺ ἡμᾶς δίδαξον
εὐχαριστεῖν σοι ἀξίως ὑπὲρ τῶν εὐεργεσιῶν σου, ὧν
ἐποίησας καὶ ποιεῖς μεθʼ ἡμῶν. Σύ, ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν, ὁ
προσδεξάμενος τὰ δῶρα ταῦτα, καθάρισον ἡμᾶς ἀπὸ παντὸς
μολυσμοῦ σαρκὸς καὶ πνεύματος καὶ δίδαξον ἐπιτελεῖν
ἁγιωσύνην ἐν φόβῳ σου, ἵνα, ἐν καθαρῷ τῷ μαρτυρίῳ
τῆς συνειδήσεως ἡμῶν, ὑποδεχόμενοι τὴν μερίδα τῶν
ἁγιασμάτων σου, ἑνωθῶμεν τῷ ἁγίῳ Σώματι καὶ Αἵματι τοῦ
Χριστοῦ σου. Καί, ὑποδεξάμενοι αὐτὰ ἀξίως, σχῶμεν τὸν
Χριστὸν κατοικοῦντα ἐν ταῖς καρδίαις ἡμῶν καὶ γενώμεθα
ναὸς τοῦ ἁγίου σου Πνεύματος.
O our God, the God who saves, teach us how to
worthily thank You for the good things You have done and
still do for us. O our God, who have accepted these gifts,
cleanse us from every defilement of body and spirit, and
teach us how to make holiness perfect in the fear of You,
so that receiving the portion of Your holy sacrament with
a clear conscience, we may be united to the holy Body and
Blood of Your Christ; and having received them worthily, we
may have Christ dwelling in our hearts and become a temple
of Your Holy Spirit.
Ναί, ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν, καὶ μηδένα ἡμῶν ἔνοχον ποιήσῃς
τῶν φρικτῶν σου τούτων καὶ ἐπουρανίων μυστηρίων,
μηδὲ ἀσθενῆ ψυχῇ καὶ σώματι ἐκ τοῦ ἀναξίως αὐτῶν
μεταλαμβάνειν· ἀλλὰ δὸς ἡμῖν μέχρι τῆς ἐσχάτης ἡμῶν
ἀναπνοῆς ἀξίως ὑποδέχεσθαι τὴν μερίδα τῶν ἁγιασμάτων
σου εἰς ἐφόδιον ζωῆς αἰωνίου, εἰς ἀπολογίαν εὐπρόσδεκτον
τὴν ἐπὶ τοῦ φοβεροῦ βήματος τοῦ Χριστοῦ σου· ὅπως
ἂν καὶ ἡμεῖς μετὰ πάντων τῶν ἁγίων τῶν ἀπʼ αἰῶνός σοι
εὐαρεστησάντων, γενώμεθα μέτοχοι τῶν αἰωνίων σου
ἀγαθῶν, ἃ ἡτοίμασας τοῖς ἀγαπῶσί σε, Κύριε.
And we implore You, our God, please do not count
any of us guilty of profaning Your awesome and heavenly
sacrament, nor make anyone weak in soul and body for
partaking of them unworthily. But rather allow us to receive
a portion of Your holy sacrament worthily, to our last breath,
as provision for eternal life and an acceptable defense at the
awesome judgment seat of Your Christ, so that along with all
the saints who throughout the ages have pleased You, we too
may become partakers of Your eternal blessings, that You
have prepared for those who love You, O Lord.
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ (ἐκφώνως) PRIEST (aloud)
Καὶ καταξίωσον ἡμᾶς, Δέσποτα, μετὰ
παῤῥησίας, ἀκατακρίτως, τολμᾶν ἐπικαλεῖσθαι
σὲ τὸν ἐπουράνιον Θεὸν Πατέρα καὶ λέγειν·
And grant us, Master, with boldness and
without condemnation, to dare call You, the
heavenly God, Father, and to say:
ΛΑΟΣ PEOPLE
Ἡ Κυριακὴ Προσευχή The Lord's Prayer
Πάτερ ἡμῶν ὁ ἐν τοῖς οὐρανοῖς,
ἁγιασθήτω τὸ ὄνομά σου. Ἐλθέτω ἡ βασιλεία
σου. Γενηθήτω τὸ θέλημά σου, ὡς ἐν
οὐρανῷ καὶ ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς. Τὸν ἄρτον ἡμῶν τὸν
ἐπιούσιον δὸς ἡμῖν σήμερον. Καὶ ἄφες ἡμῖν τὰ
ὀφειλήματα ἡμῶν, ὡς καὶ ἡμεῖς ἀφίεμεν τοῖς
ὀφειλέταις ἡμῶν. Καὶ μὴ εἰσενέγκῃς ἡμᾶς εἰς
πειρασμόν, ἀλλὰ ῥῦσαι ἡμᾶς ἀπὸ τοῦ πονηροῦ.
Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed
be Thy name. Thy kingdom come, Thy will
be done, on earth as it is in heaven. Give us
this day our daily bread; and forgive us our
trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass
against us. And lead us not into temptation, but
deliver us from evil.
    LITURGY OF ST. BASIL THE GREAT    
    25    
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ PRIEST
Ὅτι σοῦ ἐστιν ἡ βασιλεία καὶ ἡ δύναμις
καὶ ἡ δόξα τοῦ Πατρὸς καὶ τοῦ Υἱοῦ καὶ τοῦ
ἁγίου Πνεύματος, νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς
αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων.
For Thine is the kingdom and the power
and the glory, of the Father and the Son and
the Holy Spirit, now and ever and to ages of
ages.
ΧΟΡΟΣ· Ἀμήν. CHOIR: Amen.
ΚΕΦΑΛΟΚΛΙΣΙΑ BOWING OF HEADS
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ· Εἰρήνη πᾶσι. PRIEST: Peace be with all.
ΧΟΡΟΣ· Καὶ τῷ πνεύματί σου. CHOIR: And with your spirit.
ΔΙΑΚΟΝΟΣ DEACON
Τὰς κεφαλὰς ἡμῶν τῷ Κυρίῳ κλίνωμεν. Let us bow our heads to the Lord.
ΧΟΡΟΣ· Σοί, Κύριε. CHOIR: To You, O Lord.
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ (χαμηλοφώνως) PRIEST (in a low voice)
Δέσποτα Κύριε, ὁ Πατὴρ τῶν οἰκτιρμῶν καὶ Θεὸς
πάσης παρακλήσεως, τοὺς ὑποκεκλικότας σοι τὰς ἑαυτῶν
κεφαλὰς εὐλόγησον, ἁγίασον, φρούρησον, ὀχύρωσον,
ἐνδυνάμωσον, ἀπὸ παντὸς ἔργου πονηροῦ ἀπόστησον, παντὶ
δὲ ἔργῳ ἀγαθῷ σύναψον καὶ καταξίωσον ἀκατακρίτως
μετασχεῖν τῶν ἀχράντων σου τούτων καὶ ζωοποιῶν
μυστηρίων εἰς ἄφεσιν ἁμαρτιῶν, εἰς Πνεύματος ἁγίου
κοινωνίαν.
Lord and Master, Father of mercies and God of all
comfort, bless and sanctify those who have bowed their
heads to You; guard, fortify, and strengthen them. Keep them
away from every wicked deed, and attach them to every
good deed. And allow them to partake of Your immaculate
and life-giving sacrament, without condemnation, for the
forgiveness of sins and communion of the Holy Spirit.
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ (ἐκφώνως) PRIEST (aloud)
Χάριτι καὶ οἰκτιρμοῖς καὶ φιλανθρωπίᾳ τοῦ
μονογενοῦς σου Υἱοῦ, μεθʼ οὗ εὐλογητὸς εἶ,
σὺν τῷ παναγίῳ καὶ ἀγαθῷ καὶ ζωοποιῷ σου
Πνεύματι, νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν
αἰώνων.
Through the grace, compassion, and love
for humankind of Your only-begotten Son,
with whom You are blessed, and Your all-
holy, good, and life-creating Spirit, now and
ever and to the ages of ages.
ΧΟΡΟΣ· Ἀμήν. CHOIR: Amen.
ΥΨΩΣΙΣ – ΜΕΛΙΣΜΟΣ – ΕΝΩΣΙΣ – ΜΕΤΑΛΗΨΙΣ ELEVATION – FRACTION – UNION – COMMUNION
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ (χαμηλοφώνως) PRIEST (in a low voice)
Πρόσχες, Κύριε Ἰησοῦ Χριστὲ ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν, ἐξ ἁγίου
κατοικητηρίου σου καὶ ἀπὸ θρόνου δόξης τῆς βασιλείας σου
καὶ ἐλθὲ εἰς τὸ ἁγιάσαι ἡμᾶς, ὁ ἄνω τῷ Πατρὶ συγκαθήμενος
καὶ ὧδε ἡμῖν ἀοράτως συνών· καὶ καταξίωσον τῇ κραταιᾷ
σου χειρὶ μεταδοῦναι ἡμῖν τοῦ ἀχράντου Σώματός σου καὶ
τοῦ τιμίου Αἵματος καὶ δι’ ἡμῶν παντὶ τῷ λαῷ.
Hearken, O Lord Jesus Christ our God, from Your
holy dwelling place and from the throne of glory of Your
kingdom, and come to sanctify us, You who are enthroned
with the Father on high and are present among us invisibly
here. And with Your mighty hand, grant Communion of
Your most pure Body and precious Blood to us, and through
us to all the people.
    ΛΕΙΤΟΥΡΓΙΑ ΜΕΓΑΛΟΥ ΒΑΣΙΛΕΙΟΥ    
    26    
ΔΙΑΚΟΝΟΣ· Πρόσχωμεν. DEACON: Let us be attentive.
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ PRIEST
Τὰ ἅγια τοῖς ἁγίοις. The Holy Gifts for the holy people of God.
ΧΟΡΟΣ CHOIR
Εἷς ἅγιος, εἷς Κύριος, Ἰησοῦς Χριστός, εἰς
δόξαν Θεοῦ Πατρός. Ἀμήν.
One is Holy, one is Lord, Jesus Christ, to
the glory of God the Father. Amen.
Δείξε εὐχάς. Show Pre-Communion Prayers 
ΛΑΟΣ PEOPLE
ΕΥΧΑΙ ΠΡΟ ΤΗΣ ΘΕΙΑΣ ΚΟΙΝΩΝΙΑΣ PRAYERS OF HOLY COMMUNION
The selection and text of the following prayers may be
different from what is used in your parish.
Πιστεύω, Κύριε, καὶ ὁμολογῶ ὅτι σὺ εἶ ὁ
Χριστός, ὁ Υἱὸς τοῦ Θεοῦ τοῦ ζῶντος, ὁ ἐλθὼν
εἰς τὸν κόσμον ἁμαρτωλοὺς σῶσαι, ὧν πρῶτός
εἰμι ἐγώ. Ἔτι πιστεύω ὅτι τοῦτο αὐτό ἐστι τὸ
ἄχραντον Σῶμά σου καὶ τοῦτο αὐτό ἐστι τὸ
τίμιον Αἷμά σου. Δέομαι οὖν σου· ἐλέησόν
με καὶ συγχώρησόν μοι τὰ παραπτώματά μου,
τὰ ἑκούσια καὶ τὰ ἀκούσια, τὰ ἐν λόγῳ, τὰ ἐν
ἔργῳ, τὰ ἐν γνώσει καὶ ἀγνοίᾳ, καὶ ἀξίωσόν
με ἀκατακρίτως μετασχεῖν τῶν ἀχράντων σου
μυστηρίων εἰς ἄφεσιν ἁμαρτιῶν καὶ εἰς ζωὴν
αἰώνιον. Ἀμήν.
I believe and confess, Lord, that You are
truly the Christ, the Son of the living God, who
came into the world to save sinners, of whom
I am the first. I also believe that this is truly
Your pure Body and that this is truly Your
precious Blood. Therefore, I pray to You, have
mercy on me and forgive my transgressions,
voluntary and involuntary, in word and deed,
in knowledge or in ignorance. And make me
worthy, without condemnation, to partake of
Your pure sacrament for the remission of sins
and for eternal life. Amen.
Ἰδοὺ βαδίζω πρὸς θείαν κοινωνίαν·
πλαστουργέ, μὴ φλέξῃς με τῇ μετουσίᾳ· πῦρ
γὰρ ὑπάρχεις τοὺς ἀναξίους φλέγον· ἀλλʼ οὖν
κάθαρον ἐκ πάσης με κηλῖδος.
As I am about to receive holy communion,
* O Maker, I pray You not burn me partaking,
* since You are fire consuming the unworthy,
* but rather purge me of any defilement.
Τοῦ δείπνου σου τοῦ μυστικοῦ σήμερον,
Υἱὲ Θεοῦ, κοινωνόν με παράλαβε· οὐ μὴ
γὰρ τοῖς ἐχθροῖς σου τὸ μυστήριον εἴπω, οὐ
φίλημά σοι δώσω, καθάπερ ὁ Ἰούδας· ἀλλʼ ὡς
ὁ λῃστὴς ὁμολογῶ σοι· Μνήσθητί μου Κύριε,
ὅταν ἔλθῃς ἐν τῇ βασιλείᾳ σου.
Receive me, today, O Son of God, as a
partaker of Your mystical Supper. I will not
reveal Your mystery to Your enemies, nor will
I give You a kiss, as did Judas. But like the
Robber I confess to You. Remember me, O
Lord, when You come in Your kingdom.
Θεουργὸν Αἷμα φρίξον, ἄνθρωπε, βλέπων·
ἄνθραξ γάρ ἐστι τοὺς ἀναξίους φλέγων.
Seeing the deifying Blood, O human,
shudder, * for it is a live coal that burns the
    LITURGY OF ST. BASIL THE GREAT    
    27    
Θεοῦ τὸ Σῶμα καὶ θεοῖ με καὶ τρέφει· θεοῖ τὸ
πνεῦμα, τὸν δὲ νοῦν τρέφει ξένως.
unworthy. * The Body of God both deifies my
spirit * and feeds my mind in extraordinary
manner.
Ἔθελξας πόθῳ με, Χριστέ, καὶ ἠλλοίωσας
τῷ θείῳ σου ἔρωτι, ἀλλὰ κατάφλεξον πυρὶ
ἀΰλω τὰς ἁμαρτίας μου, καὶ ἐμπλησθῆναι
τῆς ἐν σοὶ τρυφῆς καταξίωσον, ἵνα τὰς δύο
σκιρτῶν μεγαλύνω, ἀγαθέ, παρουσίας σου.
You have enraptured me, O Christ, * with
Your longing and transformed me with love
divine. * I pray, completely consume * with
immaterial fire all my sins. * And count me
worthy to be filled * fully with the delight
in You, * that I may magnify * both Your
Comings, O good Master, exultantly.
Ἐν ταῖς λαμπρότησι τῶν ἁγίων σου πῶς
εἰσελεύσομαι ὁ ἀνάξιος; ἐὰν γὰρ τολμήσω
συνεισελθεῖν εἰς τὸν νυμφῶνα, ὁ χιτών με
ἐλέγχει, ὅτι οὐκ ἔστι τοῦ γάμου, καὶ δέσμιος
ἐκβαλοῦμαι ὑπὸ τῶν ἀγγέλων· Καθάρισον,
Κύριε, τὸν ῥύπον τῆς ψυχῆς μου καὶ σῶσόν με
ὡς φιλάνθρωπος.
How shall I enter into the splendor of Your
saints since I am unworthy? For if I dare to
enter the wedding hall along with them, my
garment will betray me, for it is not fit for
the wedding; and then I shall be bound and
cast out by the Angels. I pray You to wash
away the stains on my soul, and save me, O
benevolent Lord.
Δέσποτα φιλάνθρωπε, Κύριε Ἰησοῦ
Χριστέ, ὁ Θεός μου, μὴ εἰς κρῖμά μοι γένοιτο
τὰ ἅγια ταῦτα διὰ τὸ ἀνάξιον εἶναί με, ἀλλʼ εἰς
κάθαρσιν καὶ ἁγιασμὸν ψυχῆς τε καὶ σώματος
καὶ εἰς ἀῤῥαβῶνα τῆς μελλούσης ζωῆς καὶ
βασιλείας. Ἐμοὶ δὲ τὸ προσκολλᾶσθαι τῷ Θεῷ
ἀγαθόν ἐστι· τίθεσθαι ἐν τῷ Κυρίῳ τὴν ἐλπίδα
τῆς σωτηρίας μου.
Benevolent Master, Lord Jesus Christ,
my God, let not these Holy Gifts be to my
judgment because I am unworthy, but rather
for the purification and sanctification of both
soul and body and the pledge of the life and
kingdom to come. It is good for me to cleave
unto God and to place in Him the hope of my
salvation.
Τοῦ δείπνου σου τοῦ μυστικοῦ σήμερον,
Υἱὲ Θεοῦ, κοινωνόν με παράλαβε· οὐ μὴ
γὰρ τοῖς ἐχθροῖς σου τὸ μυστήριον εἴπω, οὐ
φίλημά σοι δώσω, καθάπερ ὁ Ἰούδας· ἀλλʼ ὡς
ὁ λῃστὴς ὁμολογῶ σοι· Μνήσθητί μου Κύριε,
ὅταν ἔλθῃς ἐν τῇ βασιλείᾳ σου.
Receive me, today, O Son of God, as a
partaker of Your mystical Supper. I will not
reveal Your mystery to Your enemies, nor will
I give You a kiss, as did Judas. But like the
Robber I confess to You. Remember me, O
Lord, when You come in Your kingdom.
    ΛΕΙΤΟΥΡΓΙΑ ΜΕΓΑΛΟΥ ΒΑΣΙΛΕΙΟΥ    
    28    
Κρύψε εὐχάς. Hide Pre-Communion Prayers 
ΧΟΡΟΣ CHOIR
Τὸ Κοινωνικόν Communion Hymn
(Δείτε τά μεταβλητά.) (See Liturgy Variables.)
 
ΔΙΑΚΟΝΟΣ DEACON
Μετὰ φόβου Θεοῦ, πίστεως καὶ ἀγάπης
προσέλθετε.
With the fear of God, faith, and love, draw
near.
Ὁ Ἱερεὺς αἴρει ἀπὸ τῶν χειρῶν τοῦ Διακόνου τὸ ἅγιον
ποτήριον καὶ μεταδίδωσιν ἑνὶ ἑκάστῳ τῶν προσελθόντων
διὰ τῆς λαβίδος λέγων· Σῶμα καὶ Αἷμα Χριστοῦ, εἰς ἄφεσιν
ἁμαρτιῶν καὶ εἰς ζωὴν αἰώνιον.
The people come up to receive Holy Communion. The
Priest receives the holy chalice from the hands of the Deacon
and begins communing the people, saying to each one: The
Body and Blood of Christ, for the remission of sins and life
eternal.
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ PRIEST
Σῶσον, ὁ Θεός, τὸν λαόν σου καὶ
εὐλόγησον τὴν κληρονομίαν σου.
Save, O God, Your people, and bless Your
inheritance.
ΧΟΡΟΣ CHOIR
Ὕμνος μετὰ τὴν Θ. Κοινωνίαν. Hymn after Holy Communion.
Μετά τὴν Κοινωνίαν Hymn after Holy Communion
(Δείτε τά μεταβλητά.) (See Liturgy Variables.)
 
ΔΙΑΚΟΝΟΣ (χαμηλοφώνως) DEACON (in a low voice)
Ὕψωσον, δέσποτα. Exalt, Master.
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ (χαμηλοφώνως) PRIEST (in a low voice)
Ὑψώθητι ἐπὶ τοὺς οὐρανούς, ὁ Θεός, καὶ ἐπὶ πᾶσαν τὴν
γῆν ἡ δόξα σου. (3)
Be exalted, O God, above the heavens, and let Your
glory be over all the earth. (3)
Εὐλογητὸς ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν. Blessed is our God.
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ (ἐκφώνως) PRIEST (aloud)
Πάντοτε, νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας
τῶν αἰώνων.
Always, now and ever and to the ages of
ages.
ΧΟΡΟΣ· Ἀμήν. CHOIR: Amen.
ΕΥΧΑΡΙΣΤΙΑ THANKSGIVING
ΔΙΑΚΟΝΟΣ DEACON
Ὀρθοί· μεταλαβόντες τῶν θείων, ἁγίων,
ἀχράντων, ἀθανάτων, ἐπουρανίων καὶ
ζωοποιῶν, φρικτῶν τοῦ Χριστοῦ μυστηρίων,
ἀξίως εὐχαριστήσωμεν τῷ Κυρίῳ.
Arise! Having partaken of the divine, holy,
pure, immortal, heavenly, life-creating, and
awesome Mysteries of Christ, let us worthily
give thanks to the Lord.
    LITURGY OF ST. BASIL THE GREAT    
    29    
ΧΟΡΟΣ· Κύριε, ἐλέησον. CHOIR: Lord, have mercy.
ΔΙΑΚΟΝΟΣ DEACON
Ἀντιλαβοῦ, σῶσον, ἐλέησον καὶ
διαφύλαξον ἡμᾶς, ὁ Θεός, τῇ σῇ χάριτι.
Help us, save us, have mercy on us, and
protect us, O God, by Your grace.
ΧΟΡΟΣ· Κύριε, ἐλέησον. CHOIR: Lord, have mercy.
ΔΙΑΚΟΝΟΣ DEACON
Τὴν ἡμέραν πᾶσαν, τελείαν, ἁγίαν,
εἰρηνικὴν καὶ ἀναμάρτητον αἰτησάμενοι,
ἑαυτοὺς καὶ ἀλλήλους καὶ πᾶσαν τὴν ζωὴν
ἡμῶν Χριστῷ τῷ Θεῷ παραθώμεθα.
Having prayed for a perfect, holy,
peaceful, and sinless day, let us commend
ourselves and one another and our whole life
to Christ our God.
ΧΟΡΟΣ· Σοί, Κύριε. CHOIR: To You, O Lord.
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ (χαμηλοφώνως) PRIEST (in a low voice)
ΕΥΧΗ ΜΕΤΑ ΤΟ ΜΕΤΑΛΑΒΕΙΝ ΠΑΝΤΑΣ PRAYER AFTER EVERYONE COMMUNES
Εὐχαριστοῦμέν σοι, Κύριε, ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν, ἐπὶ τῇ
μεταλήψει τῶν ἁγίων, ἀχράντων, ἀθανάτων καὶ ἐπουρανίων
σου μυστηρίων, ἃ ἔδωκας ἡμῖν ἐπʼ εὐεργεσίᾳ καὶ ἁγιασμῷ
καὶ ἰάσει τῶν ψυχῶν καὶ τῶν σωμάτων ἡμῶν. Αὐτός,
Δέσποτα τῶν ἁπάντων, δὸς γενέσθαι ἡμῖν τὴν κοινωνίαν
τοῦ ἁγίου Σώματος καὶ Αἵματος τοῦ Χριστοῦ σου εἰς πίστιν
ἀκαταίσχυντον, εἰς ἀγάπην ἀνυπόκριτον, εἰς πλησμονὴν
σοφίας, εἰς ἴασιν ψυχῆς καὶ σώματος, εἰς ἀποτροπὴν παντὸς
ἐναντίου, εἰς περιποίησιν τῶν ἐντολῶν σου, εἰς ἀπολογίαν
εὐπρόσδεκτον τὴν ἐπὶ τοῦ φοβεροῦ βήματος τοῦ Χριστοῦ
σου.
We thank You, O Lord our God, for the communion of
Your holy, immaculate, immortal, and heavenly sacrament,
which You have granted us for the benefit, sanctification,
and healing of our souls and bodies. O Master of all, grant
that the communion of the holy Body and Blood of Your
Christ may be to us for faith unashamed, love unfeigned,
fulness of wisdom, healing of soul and body, deterrence from
everything contrary, observance of Your commandments,
and for an acceptable defense at the dread judgment seat of
Your Christ.
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ (ἐκφώνως) PRIEST (aloud)
Ὅτι σὺ εἶ ὁ ἁγιασμὸς ἡμῶν, καὶ σοὶ τὴν
δόξαν ἀναπέμπομεν, τῷ Πατρὶ καὶ τῷ Υἱῷ καὶ
τῷ ἁγίῳ Πνεύματι, νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς
αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων.
For You are our sanctification, and to You
we offer up glory, to the Father and the Son
and the Holy Spirit, now and ever and to the
ages of ages.
ΧΟΡΟΣ· Ἀμήν. CHOIR: Amen.
ΑΠΟΛΥΣΙΣ DISMISSAL
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ· Ἐν εἰρήνῃ προέλθωμεν. PRIEST: Let us go forth in peace.
ΔΙΑΚΟΝΟΣ· Τοῦ Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν. DEACON: Let us pray to the Lord.
ΧΟΡΟΣ· Κύριε, ἐλέησον. CHOIR: Lord, have mercy.
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ PRIEST
ΕΥΧΗ ΟΠΙΣΘΑΜΒΩΝΟΣ AMBO PRAYER
Ὁ θυσίαν αἰνέσεως καὶ λατρείαν
εὐάρεστον, τὴν λογικὴν ταύτην καὶ
O Christ our God, You accept this rational
and bloodless sacrifice as a sacrifice of praise
    ΛΕΙΤΟΥΡΓΙΑ ΜΕΓΑΛΟΥ ΒΑΣΙΛΕΙΟΥ    
    30    
ἀναίμακτον θυσίαν προσδεχόμενος παρὰ τῶν
ἐπικαλουμένων σε ἐν ὅλῃ καρδίᾳ, Χριστὲ
ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν, ὁ ἀμνὸς καὶ Υἱὸς τοῦ Θεοῦ ὁ
αἴρων τὴν ἁμαρτίαν τοῦ κόσμου, ὁ μόσχος
ὁ ἄμωμος ὁ μὴ δεχόμενος ἁμαρτίας ζυγὸν
καὶ τυθεὶς διʼ ἡμᾶς ἑκών· ὁ μελιζόμενος καὶ
μὴ διαιρούμενος, ὁ ἐσθιόμενος καὶ μηδέποτε
δαπανώμενος, τοὺς δὲ ἐσθίοντας ἁγιάζων·
ὁ εἰς ἀνάμνησιν τοῦ ἑκουσίου πάθους σου
καὶ τῆς ζωοποιοῦ τριημέρου ἐγέρσεώς σου
κοινωνοὺς ἡμᾶς ἀναδείξας τῶν ἀῤῥήτων καὶ
ἐπουρανίων καὶ φρικτῶν σου μυστηρίων,
τοῦ ἁγίου σου Σώματος καὶ τοῦ τιμίου σου
Αἵματος· τήρησον ἡμᾶς τοὺς δούλους σου,
τοὺς διακόνους καὶ τοὺς πιστοὺς ἡμῶν
βασιλεῖς καὶ τὸν φιλόχριστον στρατὸν καὶ τὸν
περιεστῶτα λαὸν ἐν τῷ σῷ ἁγιασμῷ.
and pleasing worship. You are the lamb and
Son of God who take away the sin of the
world, the blameless young bull that does not
accept the yoke of sin, and who were offered
for us of Your own will. You are broken but
not divided, eaten but never depleted; and You
sanctify those who eat. Indeed, You made us
partakers of Your holy Body and precious
Blood, this ineffable, heavenly, and awesome
sacrament, in remembrance of Your voluntary
Passion and life-giving resurrection on the
third day. Preserve us in Your holiness, us
Your servants, those who minister, who govern
faithfully, who serve in the armed forces, and
the people here in attendance.
Καὶ δὸς ἡμῖν ἐν παντὶ χρόνῳ καὶ καιρῷ
μελετᾶν τὴν σὴν δικαιοσύνην, ὅπως, πρὸς τὸ
σὸν θέλημα ὁδηγηθέντες καὶ τὰ εὐάρεστά σοι
ποιήσαντες, ἄξιοι γενώμεθα καὶ τῆς ἐκ δεξιῶν
σου παραστάσεως, ὅταν ἐλεύσῃ κρῖναι ζῶντας
καὶ νεκρούς. Τοὺς ἐν αἰχμαλωσίᾳ ἀδελφοὺς
ἡμῶν ἀνάῤῥυσαι, τοὺς ἐν ἀσθενείᾳ ἐπίσκεψαι,
τοὺς ἐν κινδύνοις θαλάσσης κυβέρνησον καὶ
τὰς προαναπαυσαμένας ψυχὰς ἐπʼ ἐλπίδι ζωῆς
αἰωνίου ἀνάπαυσον, ὅπου ἐπισκοπεῖ τὸ φῶς
τοῦ προσώπου σου, καὶ πάντων τῶν δεομένων
τῆς σῆς βοηθείας ἐπάκουσον.
And grant us to meditate on Your
righteousness at all times and in every season,
so that being guided to Your will and doing
what is pleasing to You, we may become
worthy to stand at Your right hand when You
come to judge the living and the dead. Rescue
our brethren who are captives, visit those who
are ill, pilot travelers who are in danger, and
give rest to the souls of all who have fallen
asleep in the hope of the eternal life, where the
light of Your face shines; and hear the prayers
of all who need Your help.
Ὅτι σὺ εἶ ὁ δοτὴρ τῶν ἀγαθῶν καὶ σοὶ τὴν
δόξαν ἀναπέμπομεν σὺν τῷ ἀνάρχῳ σου Πατρὶ
καὶ τῷ παναγίῳ καὶ ἀγαθῷ καὶ ζωοποιῷ σου
Πνεύματι, νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν
αἰώνων.
For You are the giver of good things, and
we offer up glory to You and Your Father,
who is without beginning, and Your all-holy,
good, and life-creating Spirit, now and ever
and to the ages of ages.
ΧΟΡΟΣ· Ἀμήν. CHOIR: Amen.
Εἴη τὸ ὄνομα Κυρίου εὐλογημένον ἀπὸ
τοῦ νῦν καὶ ἕως τοῦ αἰῶνος. (3)
Blessed be the name of the Lord, from this
time forth and to the ages. (3)  [GOA]
    LITURGY OF ST. BASIL THE GREAT    
    31    
ΕΥΧΗ ΕΝ Τῼ ΣΥΣΤΕΙΛΑΙ ΤΑ ΑΓΙΑ PRAYER AS THE GIFTS ARE COLLECTED
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ (χαμηλοφώνως) PRIEST (in a low voice)
Ἤνυσται καὶ τετέλεσται, ὅσον εἰς τὴν ἡμετέραν
δύναμιν, Χριστὲ ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν, τὸ τῆς σῆς οἰκονομίας
μυστήριον· ἔσχομεν γὰρ τοῦ θανάτου σου τὴν μνήμην,
εἴδομεν τῆς ἀναστάσεώς σου τὸν τύπον· ἐνεπλήσθημεν
τῆς ἀτελευτήτου σου ζωῆς· ἀπηλαύσαμεν τῆς ἀκενώτου
σου τρυφῆς, ἧς καὶ ἐν τῷ μέλλοντι αἰῶνι πάντας ἡμᾶς
καταξιωθῆναι εὐδόκησον, χάριτι τοῦ ἀνάρχου σου Πατρός,
καὶ τοῦ ἁγίου καὶ ἀγαθοῦ καὶ ζωοποιοῦ σου Πνεύματος, νῦν
καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. Ἀμήν.
O Christ our God, the sacrament of Your dispensation
is completed and finished as far as it is in our power. We
had the memorial of Your death; we saw the image of Your
resurrection; we were filled with Your everlasting life; we
experienced Your inexhaustible delight. Please allow us all
to enjoy it in the age to come, by the grace of Your Father
who is without beginning and Your holy and good and life-
creating Spirit, now and ever and to the ages of ages. Amen.
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ PRIEST
Ἡ Ἀπόλυσις The Dismissal
ΔΙΑΚΟΝΟΣ· Τοῦ Κυρίου δεηθῶμεν. DEACON: Let us pray to the Lord.
ΧΟΡΟΣ· Κύριε, ἐλέησον. CHOIR: Lord, have mercy.
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ PRIEST
Εὐλογία Κυρίου καὶ ἔλεος ἔλθοι ἐφʼ ὑμᾶς
τῇ αὐτοῦ θείᾳ χάριτι καὶ φιλανθρωπίᾳ πάντοτε,
νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων.
May the blessing and the mercy of the
Lord come upon you by His divine grace and
love for humankind, always, now and ever and
to the ages of ages.
ΧΟΡΟΣ· Ἀμήν. CHOIR: Amen.
(Δείτε τά μεταβλητά.) (See Liturgy Variables.)
 
ΧΟΡΟΣ CHOIR
Τὸν εὐλογοῦντα καὶ ἁγιάζοντα ἡμᾶς,
Κύριε, φύλαττε εἰς πολλὰ ἔτη.
Lord, protect for many years the one who
blesses and sanctifies us.
ΙΕΡΕΥΣ PRIEST
Διʼ εὐχῶν τῶν ἁγίων πατέρων ἡμῶν,
Κύριε Ἰησοῦ Χριστὲ ὁ Θεός, ἐλέησον ἡμᾶς.
Through the prayers of our holy fathers,
Lord Jesus Christ our God, have mercy on us.
ΧΟΡΟΣ· Ἀμήν. CHOIR: Amen.